Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by PublicSource contributor January 22, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X train Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Over the past several years, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Portland, Ore., opposes crude-by-rail transport Officials in Multnomah County, which covers Portland, Oregon, passed a resolution to publicly note their opposition to shipping crude oil through a heavily populated area in the state. The resolution calls for a ban on crude-by-rail shipments as well as the construction of any projects that would increase the volume of crude oil in the county. KGW reports that this includes the construction of the Tesoro Savage Vancouver Energy Distribution Terminal, which would be the largest transport facility in North America. North Dakota officials permit crude oil pipeline North Dakota regulators approved plans for Dakota Access to build its $3.8 billion, 1,168-mile pipeline in the Bakken oil field. Iowa is the last state the company needs to approve construction. Its regulators are supposed to make a decision in February, according to the Williston Herald . Dakota Access plans to ship 450,000 barrels a day. Increased violations against rail, train companies The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) issued 6,485 violations in the last fiscal year, an increase of 23 percent, according to the Wall Street Journal . The FRA collected $15 million in civil penalties, its highest collection ever. The administration’s chief ordered a “zero-tolerance” policy for routes that carry crude oil and hazardous chemicals. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Reach Stephanie Roman at sroman@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @ShogunSteph . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy