Posted in Daily report , posts June 20, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 20, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Insurance mergers could impact patients The top five health insurers in the country are in discussions to consolidate, which critics say would enable them to pay less to the hospitals and take more from patients in premiums. Experts say the mergers could also make Highmark and UPMC targets for future consolidations. Erie: GE Transportation walkouts For the second time in two weeks, GE union employees staged a strike at the Erie plant Friday. The chief executive suspects it’s because GE is subcontracting work in Texas, and also because the company is meeting in New York to negotiate new labor contracts. Harrisburg: Attorney General’s office searched Investigators arrived at Attorney General Kathleen Kane’s office with warrants on Thursday. They went to the personnel department, apparently seeking emails. Kane is being investigated to see if she should be criminally charged for leaking material to the Philadelphia Daily News last year. Harrisburg: Interfaith gathering to protest for more school funding Religious groups are scheduled to meet today to call for fair funding in public schools, beyond the $400 million proposed by Gov. Tom Wolf. The group plans to fast and camp on the Capitol’s steps for 10 days. Philadelphia: Kenney attack ads originated from Illinois group Philadelphia mayoral candidate Jim Kenney won the Democratic primary, but shortly before the election he was targeted by political ads. About $93,000 was spent on the campaign by a nonprofit called Leadership Matters. An FCC document revealed the names of four of its board members, who are all tied to an educational consulting group in Peoria, Ill. Statewide: Job numbers rise, but unemployment did, too Although 18,000 more people were working in May than in April, the unemployment rate increased marginally from 5.3 percent to 5.4. About 1,000 jobs were lost in mining and logging last month. NATIONAL Charleston shooter’s bond A judge set a $1 million bond on a weapons charge for alleged church gunman Dylann Roof on Friday. His murder charges have not yet been set. He is suspected in the murders of nine people. The Confederate flag question Is is about free speech or is it about hate? Politicians, academics and regular citizens are debating its meaning , renewed because of the alleged hate-crime shootings in South Carolina.. Texas recently refused to allow it on license plates, yet the flag flies outside the South Carolina Capitol. Manhunt for escapees continues The escaped New York convicts have been added to the Marshals Service’s 15 most-wanted fugitives list. A $50,000 reward will be offered for information that leads to their capture. Ralph Roberts, founder of Comcast, dies at 95 Roberts bought a small cable company in 1963 and turned it into force that serves 27 million customers. He died of natural causes on Thursday night in Philadelphia. IN OTHER NEWS Martian New Year Mars, Pa., just north of Pittsburgh, will host the Martian New Year’s festival this weekend. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.