Special projects Forecast: Uncertain Big developers. Small businesses. Job hunters. Pittsburgh navigates a time of turmoil. When care is compulsory Allegheny County’s 302s, the push for AOT and the debate over involuntary treatment Alcoa Mines Australia’s Forest PublicSource investigates — The future of a Pittsburgh-based metals icon collides with the survival of a unique and fragile forest. 2025 Pittsburgh Mayoral Primaries The primaries for mayor were May 20. Check out information on the candidates and coverage of the issues. Pittsburgh At Work PublicSource, with Technical.ly, is exploring the landscape of work in Pittsburgh as it is pressure-tested by changes in governmental policy, technology and economics. Job One How young people with special needs enter the workforce. From Pittsburgh’s North Side Pittsburgh stories through photos Democracy & Doubt Pittsburgh navigates trust and choice in the 2024 election season PPS’ Path Forward Investigating the development and implications of Pittsburgh Public Schools’ plans to reshape the district. EQT’s Gas Play PublicSource investigates: Pittsburgh gas giant EQT pledges to tackle climate change and flexes political muscle. Communities in its frack path, though, face stark realities. Opening the Books Investigating how Pittsburgh’s wealthiest universities invest their billions Beechview Points of Pride PublicSource maps and chronicles the strengths of diverse communities. Beechview Puntos de Orgullo FuentePública (PublicSource) mapea y relata las fortalezas de comunidades diversas. Uneven Scales As PPS contends with a difficult budget season, PublicSource explores the balance of resources and its effects on students’ futures. Pencils Down How plummeting enrollment and low success rates at the Community College of Allegheny County harm students and the Pittsburgh region Wilkinsburg Points of Pride PublicSource maps and chronicles the strengths of diverse communities. Shelter Stakes As homelessness surged, Allegheny County and Pittsburgh scrambled, and those without shelter tried to adapt. Executive Decision For the first time in 12 years, Allegheny County voters in 2023 will elect a new county chief executive. Unbalanced How property tax assessments create winners and losers The Red Zone More than half of sexual assaults among college students occur in the fall. Resources, survivor stories and investigation into what’s being done to protect those at risk in the Pittsburgh area. The Exempt Dilemma Pittsburgh’s ‘eds and meds’ are economic drivers. But their tax status largely passes the bill for government to the rest of us. Faith, Race, Place Confronting Pittsburgh’s religious past to understand and heal present divides. The City of Prayer: Clairton’s residents persevere amid persistent pollution and violence Portraits of illness, trauma, advocacy and resilience. Board Explorer Understanding Pittsburgh’s unelected power structure. PWSA crisis and turnaround A crisis in Pittsburgh’s drinking water that had been brewing for decades erupted in 2016. While the crisis is over and fundamental change is underway, Pittsburgh’s water supply is still vulnerable — as much due to politics as old infrastructure. Tenant Cities More Pittsburgh households now rent than own their homes, and landlords control a growing share of the housing market countywide. PublicSource and WESA are exploring these changes. Unexcused Truancy cases continued for thousands of Allegheny County students and their families amid the pandemic. What difference has a year made? Calls for racial justice on campuses bring changes and challenges. Allegheny County Jail PublicSource is examining concerns raised about the treatment of incarcerated people with mental health issues and how chronic staffing shortages at Allegheny County Jail impact care. Screen Test After a year of COVID school, students and districts reckon with ongoing struggles and lessons learned — and reach for hope. ADA at 30: Accessibility in Pittsburgh For this anniversary project, we set out to learn: How has the ADA changed life for Pittsburghers with disabilities? And what progress still needs to be made 30 years later? Each year, PublicSource analyzes salaries of city, county and state employees because we think you have the right to know how your tax dollars are spent. The True Cost of Court Debt Stories about how court fines and fees deepen poverty and entangle people in the legal system. Tarentum, Oakdale and Glassport are among the Allegheny County towns that voted for Barack Obama in 2012 and Donald Trump in 2016. With all eyes on the battleground state of Pennsylvania, families are divided, and there’s anxiety in the Main Street air. Power of Place We looked at how Pittsburgh neighborhoods are shaping children and driving their life outcomes. Covering Climate Now Covering Climate Now is a global collaboration of more than 250 news outlets to strengthen coverage of the climate story. Low-Wage Living We set out to hear the realities and perceptions of people working in low-wage industries in the Pittsburgh region. Here’s what we learned. Good River: Stories of the Ohio Good River is a series about the environment, economy and culture of the Ohio River watershed, produced by seven nonprofit newsrooms spanning five of the 15 watershed states. Failing the Future Is the way Pennsylvania funds public education the reason some students are left behind? The Fix A series focused on telling stories about the opioid epidemic in the Pittsburgh region. B-Three Solutions Is the way Pennsylvania funds public education the reason some students are left behind? Let’s talk about RACE The conversation Pittsburgh needs to have. Teen Voices We asked teenagers in the Pittsburgh region to tell us what matters to them. Three Rivers Rising This project explores how climate change is and will be changing Pittsburgh. #PublicStreetsPGH A PublicSource social media project bringing authentic voices from Pittsburgh’s streets to you. I am a black girl and… This is our region through the eyes of black girls. Small Town, Pennsylvania Examining the challenges and opportunities of living and working in the small towns of Southwestern Pennsylvania. Archived projects The Charter Effect Clearing the Air Aftermath of Murder Pittsburgh’s gun map Pittsburgh’s diversity Trump’s first 100 days Heroin: Riding the Rush Troubled Kids, Powerful Drugs #generation Marcellus Life Single Moms About Public Source About Newsletters Contact us Send tips & ideas Advertise with us Donate Membership FAQs Republishing guidelines Our partners Board of Directors Jobs Working with us