Posted in Local Government , PUBLIC SAFETY Pittsburgh’s contract with its police has a lot to say about officer discipline. Here are the highlights. by Rich Lord June 15, 2020 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The caption of an arbitration decision handed down on Jan. 9, 2020, which governs relations between the City of Pittsburgh and the Fraternal Order of Police. The Allegheny County Black Activist/Organizer Collective demanded a dozen changes in policing policy, budgeting and staffing on Monday, June 15. The City of Pittsburgh’s interactions with its roughly 900 police officers are governed by an arbitration decision handed down in January. That 30-page decision — which modifies past contracts and decisions — came after a year of evidentiary hearings, pitting the city against the Fraternal Order of Police [FOP]. While much of the contract deals with wages and benefits, it includes planks that govern procedures when an officer is the subject of a complaint, or is suspected of misconduct or criminal activity. The arbitration decision states: Police can’t be compelled to testify before the independent Citizen Police Review Board. Officers who are the subjects of complaints are interviewed by the city’s Office of Municipal Investigations [OMI], which must give 24 hours notice before interviewing the officer. The officer can have an FOP representative present for that interview. Anonymous OMI complaints without corroborative evidence are automatically classified as unfounded, unless they could lead to criminal charges. Any OMI complaint that is ultimately deemed unfounded is destroyed one year after the investigation is completed, along with the records of the investigation. Police brass can mete out disciplinary action, from an oral reprimand to termination. Officers can file grievances to seek to reverse any disciplinary action from a written reprimand to a termination, which leads to a series of meetings and, ultimately, can end in binding arbitration before a three-member panel of arbitrators. An officer’s disciplinary history can be considered when the bureau considers promotions, and when weighing punishment options if the officer is subjected to another disciplinary action. However, disciplinary actions are removed from officer records after certain periods of time. Oral reprimands go away after two years, written reprimands after three years, suspensions after five years. (Records of the actions remain in the city Law Department and in OMI files, but are no longer considered in promotions or new disciplinary decisions.) When an officer is sued for any action taken in the course of the officer’s duties, the city provides a legal defense. In addition to defending officers against civil complaints, the city must pay $100,000 a year into a Legal Defense Fund to cover any other legal counsel officers might need to address lawsuits arising from their duties. Those funds can also be used to pay lawyers to represent the officers before OMI, the Citizen Police Review Board or in critical incident investigations . The city is allowed to transfer officers to other assignments “where events or circumstances jeopardize the ability of the officers to safely perform the duties of their position, including pending litigation or disciplinary action.” Rich Lord can be reached at rich@publicsource.org or on Twitter @richelord . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord