Sponsored Learn More PublicSource accepts sponsored content that may be of interest to our readers. The following content was paid for by the author. YWCA issues a challenge to examine race, power, privilege and leadership The YWCA Racial Justice Challenge will provide weekly activities throughout April to learn about critical issues of bodily autonomy, gun violence, finances and transportation — all issues that intersect with race and gender. Sponsored by YWCA Greater Pittsburgh March 18, 2024 February 28, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The YWCA Racial Justice Challenge offers Pittsburghers a unique opportunity to confront systemic injustice, one engaging activity at a time. (Photo courtesy of YWCA Greater Pittsburgh) In Pittsburgh, the stark realities of racial injustice are not abstract concepts but lived experiences shaping the fabric of our communities. From the alarming disparities in Black maternal mortality rates to the specter of gun violence plaguing neighborhoods and the entrenched barriers hindering generational wealth among families of color, the urgency for change is palpable. The YWCA Greater Pittsburgh is trying to answer that call by building “more effective social justice habits” within the community via its Racial Justice Challenge throughout the month of April. This largely virtual event offers Pittsburghers a unique opportunity to confront systemic injustice, one engaging activity at a time. The goal is to create more space in participants’ daily lives to act on their values. Activities include reading an article or listening to a podcast, and each activity follows a weekly theme. This year’s themes are: Week 1 of the YWCA Racial Justice Challenge will focus on Bodily Autonomy, including Black maternal mortality. Pittsburgh’s Black maternal mortality rate is higher than Black maternal mortality rates in 97% of similar cities. (Photo courtesy of Getty Images Signature) Bodily autonomy: Topics covered will include medical abuse historically perpetuated against people of color, the racist origins of fatphobia, reproductive rights, Black hair, and transgender health care. This theme will also touch on the current maternal mortality crisis facing Black women, a topic especially relevant here in Pittsburgh. ( Pittsburgh’s Black maternal mortality rate is higher than Black mortality rates in 97% of similar cities ) Women’s financial empowerment and caregiving: Topics include financial disparities in the historic women’s rights movement, unpaid labor such as caring for children and elders, entrepreneurship in communities of color, financial abuse and financial literacy. Gun violence: This theme includes the racist roots of the Second Amendment, suicide rates in communities of color, and how gun violence connects to intimate partner violence and white supremacy. Transportation: Learn about the history of racial discrimination in transportation, gender and sexuality in transportation advocacy, racial bias in traffic enforcement, and how to envision a world beyond cars. “Our goal with this event is to provide a resource that is accessible to those just beginning their racial justice journey, while also providing curated content to interest those who have been doing this work for decades,” said Dr. Angela Reynolds, CEO of YWCA Greater Pittsburgh. “People of all backgrounds can learn something new.” Week 2 of the YWCA Racial Justice Challenge will focus on Financial Empowerment and Caregiving, including pay equity. YWCA Greater Pittsburgh addresses this issue locally via their Level Up Greater Pittsburgh Pay Equity Campaign. (Photo courtesy of YWCA Greater Pittsburgh) While many participate in the Racial Justice Challenge as individuals, organizations such as La Roche University see the event as an opportunity to spark community conversations. In the past, the university held weekly in-person discussion groups corresponding to each of the Racial Justice Challenge’s four themes. “YWCA Greater Pittsburgh’s Racial Justice Challenge gave our campus community a strong foundation of knowledge and supplied us with common language to draw from when discussing matters of equity and injustice,” said Sarah White, chief diversity officer at La Roche. “I appreciated that subjects were examined through a global lens, taking into account that not all participants come from the same backgrounds and experiences. At the same time, examples of local issues were tied in where relevant, allowing participants to connect to familiar situations while also understanding diverse experiences from outside of our area.” This year, YWCA Greater Pittsburgh will be hosting its own in-person events during the challenge. Each Friday in April, the organization will host a discussion group for participants from 3 to 4:30 p.m. in its office at 2313 E. Carson St., with refreshments provided. “Our discussion groups are a great way for community members to connect with each other over shared values,” said Sebastian Lacy, YWCA Greater Pittsburgh’s vice president of equity and culture. “Whether you plan to complete every Racial Justice Challenge activity or just want to learn more about YWCA Greater Pittsburgh’s programs, we encourage all who are interested to attend.” Registration is open; those interested in participating can visit YWCA Greater Pittsburgh’s website to learn more. Sponsored by YWCA Greater Pittsburgh YWCA Greater Pittsburgh is a member of a nationally recognized movement with a mission to eliminate racism, empower women, and promote peace, justice, freedom and dignity for all. Learn more about YWCA Greater Pittsburgh Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow