Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts Improper emails could ensnare another member of the PA Supreme Court by Eric Holmberg October 8, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pennsylvania Supreme Court Justice J. Michael Eakin Just about every kind of racist, sexist and inappropriate email was found in the private inbox of Pennsylvania Supreme Court Justice J. Michael Eakin, according to new records obtained by the Philadelphia Daily News . Roughly a year after pornographic and other unseemly emails brought down Pennsylvania Supreme Court Justice Seamus McCaffery, Eakin may now be in similarly hot water. McCaffery, according to Eakin, had previously threatened to release inappropriate emails that Eakin sent or received from a private email address at Yahoo.com under the name “John Smith.” At the time, however, only three inappropriate Eakin emails surfaced, with two depicting topless women and the third mocking a photo of black teens, according to a previous Daily News story. According to the new Daily News story, the newspaper submitted a records requests for the Eakin emails, which was denied by the Pennsylvania Attorney General’s office, and then received the emails described in the story from an anonymous source. According to the story : The emails provide a glimpse of the off-the-record communication among lawyers, judges and others in the Pennsylvania criminal-justice system. Senior Deputy Attorney General Jeffrey Baxter in 2009 sent Eakin and two other people an email with a video of a black woman lamenting that President Obama wanted to create new jobs. “New jobs?” she asks. “What, you mean I’m not going to get my government check?” The emails, while obviously inappropriate, could be in violation of the state’s Code of Judicial Conduct. According to the story : Lawrence Fox, a Philadelphia lawyer and supervising lawyer for the Ethics Bureau at Yale Law School, said the emails are troubling. “If they’re having this kind of relationship where they’re sharing material that might prove very embarrassing, it reflects a very close relationship in some way,” Fox said. “We don’t send private jokes to anybody. We send them to our inner circle.” The Pennsylvania Supreme Court currently has three vacancies out of seven seats. McCaffery retired because of the email scandal; Justice Joan Orie Melvin resigned because she used her Superior Court staffers to work on her campaigns; and Justice Correale Stevens was defeated in this year’s Republican primary. There are seven candidates for those three seats in next month’s election. PublicSource will provide coverage leading up to the race, starting Tuesday, Oct. 13. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @holmberges . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI