Posted in On the beat , posts Big oil firms paid for alleged cheating on royalties; now fight disclosure by Alexandra Kanik May 23, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Thomson Reuters Foundation, with help from the Sunlight Foundation and Transparency International, has found that oil and gas companies paid $3 billion in recent years in fines, settlements and audits after they were accused of cheating on royalties. According to the foundation : Oil companies have paid $3 billion over the past 15 years to resolve a range of charges including that they regularly cheated the U.S. government and Native American communities out of royalties on oil and gas leases, raising concerns they use similar techniques to rob citizens in poor countries of resource wealth. The Thomson Reuters Foundation found violations across three categories between 1998 and 2013: False Claims Act settlements, civil penalties and audits or other compliance checks. False Claims Act settlements result from lawsuits that allege a company made false or fraudulent royalty payments on oil or gas leases with the U.S. government and Native American tribes. Compiled from U.S. Justice Department press releases, they found $739.2 million was paid out in False Claims Act settlements. Of the total, Shell paid $168 million and ExxonMobil paid $84 million. These are the same companies leading the fight in the United States against strong transparency regulations that human rights advocates say are needed to help address massive corruption and extreme poverty in many resource-rich countries. The largest category was $2.2 billion in corrective payments that resulted from audits by the Office of Natural Resources Revenue after the agency checked whether oil and gas companies were paying the right amount of royalties. The Thomson Reuters Foundation analyzed data from Office of Natural Resources Revenue, the agency that oversees revenue from mineral leases, and used tools from the Sunlight Foundation, including Influence Explorer and Docket Wrench to catalog 15 years of payments. Reach Eric Holmberg at eholmberg@publicsource.org or 412-315-0266. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.