Posted in IN-DEPTH Underemployed, out of work by Weenta Girmay May 12, 2015 June 12, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Christina Ailor, 27, graduated with a political science degree but has been unable to find a job where it applies. She works two part-time jobs and still has trouble making ends meet. (Photo by Ohad Cadji) Coming of age in a recession when your degree doesn’t always land you a job has been a harsh reality for Millennials to face. In Pennsylvania, the average unemployment rate for this group in 2014 was 7.4 percent, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. For all Pennsylvanians, regardless of age, an average of 4.4 percent were considered to be underemployed, which can mean a worker was overqualified for their job or had to take part-time work because a full-time job was not available. Christina Ailor, 27, knows that all too well. She works two part-time jobs, as a tea house barista and a manager at Family House, which provides lodging for patients who are being treated at Pittsburgh-area hospitals and their families. Ailor puts in a combined 45 hours, six days a week. One job pays minimum wage, the other $10.25 an hour. She also relies on public assistance to help pay for groceries. This wasn’t how it was supposed to be. Ailor graduated with a political science degree from the University of Pittsburgh in 2013. Between five internships and managing a congressional campaign office in Erie, she had three years of work experience by the time she started her job search. Ailor was open to jobs in government and communications, both in the nonprofit and private sectors. She landed a few interviews, but she said employers thought she was either overqualified or didn’t fulfill their laundry list of specialized skills. “It seems like what employers want is someone … to just show up on their doorstep already trained and experienced,” she said. “It’s very demoralizing to have worked so hard to finish my degree, especially because for some of that tuition, I worked and saved that tuition dollar by dollar … and then to be making less than $20,000 a year at this point in my life, it’s very upsetting to me.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Employment Weenta Girmay weenta@yahoo.com Weenta Girmay is a freelance reporter in Pittsburgh. Originally from Silver Spring, Md., she is a graduate of the University of Pittsburgh.

“As a Millennial myself, I’ve wondered if the choices... More by Weenta Girmay