Posted in VIDEO ‘This was my bouquet’: At Tree of Life, a violinist offers up music as a means to mourn by Ryan Loew November 9, 2018 December 17, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pushing past cold fingers and the occasional breeze that would flap her sheet music, Monique Mead stood outside the Tree of Life synagogue in Squirrel Hill to grieve with others. To her music stand she taped a photo of Leonard Bernstein and this quote from the iconic musician: “This will be our reply to violence: to make music more intensely, more beautifully, more devotedly than ever before.” And so, on a recent Sunday afternoon, at the site where 11 people were killed on Oct. 27, Mead did just that — played her Italian violin as dozens of mourners quietly paid their respects. The 49-year-old Shadyside resident was deliberate about the choice of the songs she played: two Jewish melodies, including the prayer “Eli, Eli,” as well as “Sunrise, Sunset” from “Fiddler on the Roof.” Mead considers Bernstein a mentor and inspiration. She said she toured with him when she was a 19-year-old student; he was conducting during the well-known Schleswig-Holstein Musik Festival in Germany in 1989. “He inspired my career path,” she said. Now she is the director of music entrepreneurship at Carnegie Mellon University’s School of Music. Mead was raised “in a family that was as Mormon as they come,” she said, but as she immersed herself into the world of music, she found herself drawn to what could be considered traditionally Jewish music. At age 21, she learned that her maternal grandmother was Jewish and had fled Berlin to escape the Nazis. Her great-grandmother, who was also Jewish, had been an opera singer in Kiev. “My whole musical talent, I suppose, had come through that line,” Mead said. “The whole violin tradition that I grew up in was the Russian tradition, and these were Jewish-Russian musicians, and so I was just bonding with a tradition that was in the end really my own.” Ryan Loew is PublicSource’s visual storyteller/producer. He can be reached at ryan@publicsource.org or on Twitter at @RyanLoew . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Ryan Loew ryan@publicsource.org x Ryan is a PublicSource visual producer/storyteller. He joined PublicSource after being a freelance producer of news features and documentary stories in the Pittsburgh region and beyond. His work appeared... More by Ryan Loew