Posted in Daily report , posts May 13, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 13, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Susquehanna Township: Four schools in lockdown Thomas Holtzman Elementary School received a computer-generated phone threat Tuesday that indicated a person was on the roof and would kill the kids. Holtzman and three other schools in the district were placed in lockdown and swept by police, but nothing was found and the lockdowns were lifted. An investigation is ongoing. Pittsburgh: Campaign shenanigans City Councilman Ricky Burgess attempted to swipe a campaign sign from the yard of his District 9 opponent, Judith Ginyard, but was spotted by Ginyard on Friday night. Burgess never actually took the sign, so no charges will be filed against him. Pittsburgh: Attorney General sues landlord The Attorney General’s office filed a complaint with the Common Pleas Court Tuesday against Davin Gartley and his companies, which alleged that the defendants failed to maintain habitable properties by not providing water service. Harrisburg: Plan to cut school property tax and raise sales and income taxes State lawmakers advanced a Republican plan that would cut nearly $5 billion in local property taxes, but will raise the state sales tax from 6 to 7 percent and increase the personal income tax from 3.07 to 3.7 percent. Harrisburg: Medical marijuana bill passes Senate On Tuesday, legislation passed through the state Senate that would allow the use medical use of marijuana to treat ailments like chronic pain, Crohn’s disease and diabetes. Last year, a similar bill made it to the House, but never made it to a vote. Statewide: The pollen problem A lack of rain in Pennsylvania means the amount of pollen is steadily accumulating and deeply affecting the allergic population. Levels of carbon dioxide in the air directly influence the quantities of pollen, and projections indicate that by 2060, the amount of pollen will double from its quantity in 2000. NATIONAL Prison rape continues to go ignored Although the Prison Rape Elimination Act went into effect in 2003, rape in Texas prisons continues, often with gay and transgender inmates as the victim. A Justice Department survey reveals that 40 percent of transgender inmates experience sexual victimization. Verizon buys AOL The cellphone giant bought out the former Internet titan on Tuesday for $4.4 billion —in cash—at $50 a share. Verizon’s probably aiming to bring more television content to its assortment of mobile phones. Decline in religiosity The Pew Research Center released its findings gathered from over 35,000 Americans: 173 million, or 71 percent, of Americans self-identify as Christian, which is down from 78 percent and 178 million people, the figures reported in the 2007 study. Patriots’ punishment Penalties have been imposed against Tom Brady and the New England Patriots for participating in Deflategate: Brady will be suspended without pay for four games (the first of which is versus the Steelers), the Patriots will be fined $1 million and the Patriots will lose their first round draft pick in 2016 and fourth round pick in 2017. WORLD More damage in Nepal Nepal was devastated last month by a 7.8 magnitude earthquake and fierce aftershocks, and was hit Tuesday by another debilitating 7.3 magnitude tremor. IN OTHER NEWS Science creates ‘dino-chickens’ These aren’t the dinosaur chicken nuggets from your youth. They’re the attempt to recreate dinosaur to chicken evolution by inhibiting certain proteins that alter facial structure, and the result is a snout that looks like a cross between a chicken and alligator. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor ‘Game of Thrones’ based on real-world history The fantasy novel series by George R.R. Martin and hit HBO show have a lot in common with the English civil wars, the Wars of the Roses, which featured huge dynastic conflicts, no clear monarchical successor and many premature deaths. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI