Posted in Equity , IN-DEPTH Rare voices: Pittsburgh women in politics by Martha Rial and Emily DeMarco June 20, 2012 November 17, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Women’s voices are uncommon on the Pennsylvania political scene. In fact, the state ranks 47th in the nation in terms of female representation and participation in politics. That’s one reason photographer Martha Rial took a closer look at the political lives of three women of different generations in the region. From them, she found that the issue of gender in politics hasn’t changed much in 50 years. On the floor of Congress, only one of the 21 people who represent Pennsylvania is female. And the female population — which makes up 51 percent of its citizens — has yet to see a woman serve as governor or U.S. Senator. At the local level, the gender gap is equally dramatic. “Fifty-seven percent of our county councils have not one female voice,” said Dana Brown, executive director of the Pennsylvania Center for Women and Politics at Chatham University. In Allegheny County, four of the 15 council members are women. That means 27 percent of the council is female, yet women make up 52 percent of the county. How many of the 85 locally elected mayors and executives that govern the boroughs and townships in Allegheny County are women? Six. That amounts to just 7 percent of the group. Tina Doose, council president of Braddock Borough — a neighborhood east of Pittsburgh — is one of the three politicians included in Rial’s work. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “The good old boys’ club still exists,” Doose said. “And it’s not going away anytime soon, or easily.” Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Employment , Women's rights Martha Rial _migrated-47-martha-rial@example.com Martha Rial is an independent photographer based in Pittsburgh. She previously worked as a staff photographer for the St Petersburg Times and her hometown paper, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Rial was awarded... More by Martha Rial