Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY After release, Pennsylvania’s inmates face a health care desert — but a new bill may change that by PublicSource contributor July 6, 2016 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X When an inmate enters the correctional system in Pennsylvania, the state terminates their access to Medicaid and relies on hundreds of thousands of dollars in state funds. But after release from county jail or a state correctional facility, there is only one real option for newly-freed prisoners — a health care lapse of up to 45 days while a standard Medicaid application is processed, according to federal guidelines . This could all shift under a bill to change the state’s Human Services code , which would allow Medicaid coverage for inmates to be suspended or paused, rather than terminated. The Affordable Care Act has increased Medicaid funding for many states, including Pennsylvania, meaning more people have access to health coverage. The federal government suggests that states allow inmates to remain on Medicaid and to suspend rather than terminate coverage. A 2004 letter from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services said that inmates “may be enrolled in the program [Medicaid] before, during, and after the time in which they are held” in jail or prison. It is a state’s decision whether or not to follow the agency’s guidelines. Pennsylvania is one of 19 states which still terminate Medicaid enrollment for prisoners once incarcerated, according to data from Families USA , a nonprofit health care advocacy group. When the state terminates coverage, the recently released prisoner must reapply for Medicaid, which not only places a burden on the individual, but the state, which must process applications for repeat offenders. Sen. Pat Vance, R-Cumberland, the bill’s sponsor, confirmed that the new legislation aims to save money, according to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . By allowing prisoners to immediately re-enroll in Medicaid, terminating the 45 day buffer period, individuals will also have a smoother transition into the outside world, advocates say, especially if they are living with mental health problems. Vance said this benefits both individuals and taxpayers. Access to health care can keep former inmates from returning to incarceration, according to Elizabeth Hagen, senior policy analyst at Families USA. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Additionally, if inmates’ Medicaid plans are suspended, rather than terminated, the federal government allocates additional Medicaid funds to cover inpatient costs. As of 2011, the cost of health care in Pennsylvania was $4,705 per state inmate, according to a 2014 analysis by The Pew Charitable Trusts and the MacArthur Foundation. The bill to change Pennsylvania’s inmate Medicaid standard from termination to suspension has already passed in both the House and the Senate, unanimously. Gov. Tom Wolf is currently reviewing the legislation. Reach Courtney Linder at clinder@publicsource.org. Follow her on Twitter @CNL_13 . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice