Posted in Environment , posts Atlantic Sunrise makes its official application to build pipeline in PA by Natasha Khan April 1, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Williams, the company behind the Atlantic Sunrise Pipeline, has officially filed its application with federal regulators to build about 200 miles of new pipeline in Pennsylvania. Currently, there aren’t enough pipelines built to move gas produced in the Marcellus and Utica shales to other markets. The project is just one of many big pipeline projects in the works to move the glut of gas. If built, the Atlantic Sunrise would move gas from northeastern Pennsylvania to the eastern seaboard. It would move through 10 counties: Columbia, Lancaster, Lebanon, Luzerne, Northumberland, Schuylkill, Susquehanna, Wyoming, Clinton and Lycoming. The pipeline has faced intense opposition, especially from groups and residents in Lancaster County, since a pre-filing was made more than a year ago. PublicSource recently wrote about Native Americans protesting the pipeline. Farmers, environmentalists and local residents oppose it and cite concerns about the environment, safety and property values. Williams has made several changes to the pipeline’s route in response to public feedback, according to StateImpact PA. “The construction and operation of the proposed facilities will not have a significant impact on human health or the environment,” Williams wrote in its application. “The public benefits of the project are far more substantial than the potential adverse effects.” The company seeks approval from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) by April 2016, so the pipeline can be up and running by July 2017. To see new maps of its proposed route, check out the pipe’s FERC filing here and search for docket number CP15-138. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan