Posted in Election 2024 Primary Day 2024: how to vote in Pennsylvania for nominees for president, Congress and state offices Part voters can select nominees today for November’s General Election. Vote in person or return a mail ballot by 8 p.m. by Charlie Wolfson April 23, 2024 April 23, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A person arrives at the Church of the Resurrection polling station in Monroeville on Tuesday, April 23, 2024. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Read more: Live election results: 2024 Pennsylvania primaries for president, Congress and more Polls are open for the 2024 primary elections today until 8 p.m., and Allegheny County voters have until that time to return mail-in ballots to the elections office Downtown. Democratic and Republican primaries for president, Congress, statewide office and state legislature are on the ballot to determine nominees for the General Election on Nov. 5. Voting by mail has been underway for weeks, and tallies released by the county so far suggest no change to the now-familiar pattern of Democrats making significant use of mail-in balloting (the only form of early voting available in Pennsylvania) while Republicans overwhelmingly wait until Election Day to vote. U.S. Rep. Summer Lee, D-Swissvale, speaks to the media after voting at the Swissvale Community Food Bank. Lee confirmed that she voted for President Joe Biden in the primary. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Of about 121,712 primary ballots mailed to county voters, 82% went to Democrats. While state GOP leaders have begun imploring their voters to adopt early voting, former President Donald Trump has continued disparaging mail voting. At least for now, Allegheny County Republicans appear to be largely following the former president’s advice. Edgewood Councilor Bhavini Patel talks to the media as she arrives to greet voters at the Church of the Resurrection polling station in Monroeville. Patel, a Democrat, is challenging incumbent U.S. Rep. Summer Lee in the primary election. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Here is what you need to know about participating in today’s elections: Can I vote today? Only voters who are registered as Democrats or Republicans can vote in the primaries. Independent voters or those registered with minor parties cannot participate. Where and when can I vote? Use this website to find out where your polling place is. As long as you are in line by 8 p.m., you can vote. Double check: More than 60 polling places changed locations for this election, including 16 that typically are located in synagogues that are unavailable because the election falls on the Jewish holiday of Passover. What if I have a mail-in ballot? Ballots must be received by the county by 8 p.m. today to be counted — no exceptions. If a ballot is placed in the mail today, it will not be counted. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Voters can deliver completed mail-in ballots to the County Office Building at 542 Forbes Avenue (Ross Street entrance). A voter can only deliver their own ballot, not one belonging to anyone else. If you have a mail-in ballot but prefer to vote at your neighborhood polling place, you can surrender the mail-in ballot at the polling location and vote there. If you already submitted a mail-in ballot, you cannot vote in person. Any voter with a disability as defined by the ADA can designate somebody else to deliver their ballot using this form . Election 2024 Young voters helped decide the 2020 election in Pa. Will they turn out for a Biden-Trump rematch? High school and college-age voters in Allegheny County say they are frustrated, unenthused and even scared of the political situation in the country as the primary election looms. Who is on the ballot Voters of the two major parties will select nominees for president, the U.S. House of Representatives, the U.S. Senate, state House and Senate, and the state offices of attorney general, auditor general and treasurer. Most legislative districts have little to no competition in the primaries this cycle. Main exceptions include the 12th Congressional District (held by Democrat Summer Lee), the 32nd state House district (held by Democrat Joe McAndrew), the 34th state House district (held by Democrat Abigail Salisbury) and two seats with no incumbent running (state Senate district 45 and state House district 38). To see your options before you head to the polls, use this website to view a sample ballot . Learn more Read PublicSource coverage leading up to Tuesday’s elections. Who’s running in Allegheny County elections in 2024? A PublicSource and 90.5 WESA investigation found local Republicans working to remove thousands of Allegheny County residents from the voter rolls, but the action won’t likely affect voters ahead of the 2024 elections. The Democratic primary for Pittsburgh’s congressional seat attracted more than $1 million in independent spending from outside the region , including from conservative billionaire Jeffrey Yass. The region’s youngest voters, preparing to cast their first presidential votes, are feeling anxious, unenthused and even scared ahead of a rematch between Joe Biden and Donald Trump. How can I find election results? PublicSource will publish live election results for all contested races involving part or all of Allegheny County, with data and race calls from the Associated Press. View up-to-the-minute results on PublicSource.org, and follow @PublicSourcePA on X for updates as the night unfolds and winners are determined. Charlie Wolfson is PublicSource’s local government reporter and a Report for America corps member. He can be reached at charlie@publicsource.org. Election 2024 Who’s running in Allegheny County elections in 2024? Southwestern Pennsylvania could determine control of the White House, the Pennsylvania legislature and Congress. Here are the candidates running in the General Election. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: 2024 , Allegheny County , Donald Trump , Elections , Joe Biden , Pennsylvania , Pittsburgh , Primaries , Summer Lee , voting Charlie Wolfson charlie@publicsource.org x Charlie Wolfson is an enterprise reporter for Pittsburgh's Public Source, focusing on local government accountability and politics in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. He was a Report for America corps... More by Charlie Wolfson