Posted in ELECTION 2022 Voter turnout surged in most of Allegheny County, but sagged where it was already weak From Findlay to Forward to Plum, midterm voting eclipsed 2018 levels, but some of Allegheny County’s most populous areas saw flat or declining participation. by Charlie Wolfson November 15, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X People line up to enter the polling location at the United Methodist Church of Oakmont as the polls open early Tuesday morning on Election Day. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Democrats swept to unexpected victories across the country last week, defying historical trends for midterm elections, including in Pennsylvania. Josh Shapiro won the governorship in a blowout and John Fetterman, recovering from a stroke and facing a flood of negative advertising against him, eked out a win for the U.S. Senate. Allegheny County was no exception, with state Sen. Lindsey Williams, D-Pittsburgh, and state Rep.-elect Arvind Venkat, D-McCandless, comfortably winning what were thought to be swing districts; and U.S. Rep.-elect Chris Deluzio winning as a Democrat in a swing district in which Republicans invested heavily. Turnout was up statewide compared to the 2018 midterms, and in Allegheny County it rose from 58% to 60%. It didn’t rise uniformly across the county, though, with some lower-turnout areas seeing a decline from 2018. Of the county’s 130 municipalities, 15 saw turnout lower than in 2018. Turnout may have been escalated by more animated state legislative races; a more competitive, redrawn map spurred Democrats to push for a House majority and drive up participation in districts like Venkat’s in the North Hills. Turnout sagged in parts of the Mon Valley and eastern suburbs, with Penn Hills, Rankin and Wilkinsburg  each seeing a slight decline from 2018. Clairton, which was among the locales with the lowest 2018 turnout, edged up by 0.6 percentage points this year. Turnout in various Allegheny Co. legislative districts with 95% of precincts in (countywide turnout 59.9%) SD38 (Williams): 65% HD20 (Kinkead): 63% HD30 (Venkat): 70% HD33 (Steele): 64% — Charlie Wolfson (@chwolfson) November 9, 2022 An analysis of the 2018 election’s turnout showed that the region’s most marginalized communities made the least noise at the ballot box — municipalities with lower income and higher minority populations tended to vote less. That trend didn’t change significantly in 2022, and in some cases it got worse. The largest increases from 2018 were seen in Trafford (up 12 percentage points), South Versailles (up 11 points), West Elizabeth (up 10 points) and Forward Township (up 10 points). In Pittsburgh, turnout edged up half a point to 51.2%. Candidate hometowns were a mixed bag. Thornburg, home of Chris Deluzio, led the county in turnout at 79%. (Deluzio has long lived in Pittsburgh but talked during the campaign of his Thornburg upbringing.) But Braddock, famously the home of Sen.-elect Fetterman, was near the low end at 40%, down three points from 2018. U.S. Rep.-elect Summer Lee, who launched her campaign in Braddock last year, grew up in neighboring North Braddock (up two points to 47%). Plum is where Republican congressional candidate Mike Doyle serves on the borough council, and though he lost to Lee in the 12th district, turnout surged to 66% in Plum. Pittsburgh’s turnout map shows a decline from 2018 throughout predominantly Black neighborhoods in the northeast of the city and the North Side. Turnout rose in parts of the liberal 14th Ward, South Hills and West End. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Charlie Wolfson is PublicSource’s local government reporter and a Report for America corps member. He can be reached at charlie@publicsource.org or on Twitter @chwolfson . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , Elections , John Fetterman , Josh Shapiro , Voter Turnout Charlie Wolfson charlie@publicsource.org x Charlie Wolfson is an enterprise reporter for Pittsburgh's Public Source, focusing on local government accountability and politics in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. He was a Report for America corps... More by Charlie Wolfson