Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by PublicSource contributor August 28, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early this year, there have been numerous train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Oregon DOT adds new rail safety inspectors In addition, the Department of Transportation established new rules that now require railroads to immediately notify emergency responders when incidents involve hazardous materials and submit quarterly reports to the DOT. The DOT also has the power to fine railroads $1,000 a day for not complying with the new rules. Iowa holds Railroad Safety Symposium Various law enforcement, federal and emergency agencies teamed up with the Federal Rail Administration to plan ahead for incidents. The symposium helped establish who would be responsible for what if a derailment or other emergency takes place. Senators lobby for new TSA measures U.S. Sens. Richard Blumenthal (D-CT) and Cory Booker (D-NJ) sent letters imploring the Transportation Security Administration to adopt the safety measures mandated by 2007 law. In the wake of last week’s French terrorist attack, Sen. Blumenthal also recommends all train station employees have background checks . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Stephanie Roman at sroman@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @ShogunSteph . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy , Transportation