Posted in Equity Peduto recommends Columbus statue removal after Art Commission vote Pittsburgh’s Art Commission votes unanimously on Sept. 23 to remove Columbus statue by Atiya Irvin-Mitchell October 9, 2020 October 14, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pittsburgh's statue of Christopher Columbus in Schenley Park in Oakland, near Phipps Conservatory and Botanical Gardens, as seen on June 22. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Update (Oct. 9, 2020): Mayor Bill Peduto announced today that he recommends the removal of the city’s Christopher Columbus statue in Schenley Park to a private location. Neither the date of removal nor the new location have been decided, according to a press release from the mayor’s office. The City of Pittsburgh’s Art Commission voted on Sept. 23 to remove the statute. In a letter to the commission , Peduto noted that Columbus is a celebrated figure among Italian-Americans but also described the explorer’s “support of slavery and genocide.” In his letter, the mayor asked for the commission to vote again to officially remove and decommission the statue. “After much thought and prayer I believe it is now time for us to return the Columbus statue to the Italian-American community that brought it into existence,” Peduto wrote. “They can preserve it in a manner than celebrates Italian-American culture, while acknowledging the wreckage that slavery and racism has done to America.” Following months of heated debate, the City of Pittsburgh’s Art Commission voted unanimously on Sept. 23 to remove the Christopher Columbus statue in Schenley Park. “Let us celebrate those who built this city rather than the conquerors who had nothing to do with our city and massacred innocent people,” Commissioner Andrew Moss said. “Removal should not be seen as erasure of history; removal of a monument reflects a change in our society and of our public identity as a community.” As of Sept. 22 afternoon, the commission had received more than 5,000 comments from the public about the statue. Of those: 1,937 commenters favored removal; 1,818 commenters were against taking any action on the statue; 1,445 were in favor of replacing the statue; Roughly 1,000 of the total comments were logged by people not living in Pittsburgh. At a previous meeting on the statue in August, there was disagreement about if the Art Commission’s decision on the statue’s fate would be final or if it should be seen as a recommendation for the Mayor’s Office to consider. Further questioning the five-member commission’s authority before the meeting’s vote, the Department of City Planning director reiterated that the commission serves as an advisory board to the mayor. The commissioners, however, held firm on its belief that it has the authority to make decisions with regard to public art. City Planning Director Andrew Dash appeared to read from a city Law Department letter issued earlier in the day, saying that the Art Commission should only make recommendations and leave ratification of any potential decisions to the mayor at a future meeting. “As previously discussed, the Law Department has concluded that the Art Commission serves as an advisory board and cannot spontaneously ratify the removal of public art in the city without a decision from the mayor…” he said. “It’s important,” Dash continued, “that government bodies follow procedure in taking official actions as to avoid the risk of procedural challenges that could result in those actions being voided by the court.” In response, Commission Vice Chair Kilolo Luckett said: “In our city ordinance, it is under the Art Commission’s purview and that we do have the authority to make a decision.” While debates over the commission’s power may continue, the commissioners argued that it’s best the statue be moved to a museum with education about what led to the statue’s construction and be replaced with a figure that represents the “City for All” Pittsburgh markets itself to be. The consensus among commissioners was that although they empathized with the discrimination the Italian-American community has endured in the past, allowing a figure such as Columbus to remain on a pedestal came at the expense of the communities harmed by his behaviors. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “Glorifying our history by subjugating another doesn’t elevate us,” Commissioner Sarika Goulatia said. “Italian-Americans have a rich culture and a rich heritage. Their warmth and inclusivity gives them the power to be celebrated alongside Indigenous Pittsburghers. This is a pivotal moment where we can show our connection as human beings, where our glory cannot ride on another’s pain or a single perspective.” Despite historians’ take on Columbus’s actions, many Italian-Americans inside and outside of the community still view him as a hero and have resolved to challenge any decision to remove his statue. Basil Russo, president of the Italian Sons and Daughters of America [ISDA], testified that his organization has retained legal counsel to keep the statue in place no matter what the city decided. “The ISDA feels very strongly about this issue. We feel that this effort to remove this statue from Schenley Park is an effort to erase the history of Italian Americans in the city of Pittsburgh and contributions Italian Americans have made to this city,” Russo said. “We are prepared to do whatever is necessary legally to protect our community’s interests and to ensure that our community’s interests are not overridden by any other community.” Atiya Irvin-Mitchell is a Pittsburgh-based freelance writer. She can be reached at airvinmitchell@gmail.com and you can follow her on Twitter @AtiyaWrites . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI