Posted in Equity Hundreds support Black trans rights in march from Freedom Corner through downtown Pittsburgh by Jay Manning June 18, 2020 June 18, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Hundreds of people march down Centre Avenue holding signs, flags and banners during the Pittsburgh Action for Black Trans Lives on June 18, 2020. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) On the eve of Juneteenth and following a historic Supreme Court victory for LGBTQ rights, hundreds of demonstrators gathered in the Hill District Thursday for a rally and march seeking justice for the Black transgender community. The rally, convened by TransYOUniting, marks the 20th day of protests in Pittsburgh against racism since a former Minneapolis police officer killed George Floyd last month. Demonstrators met at Freedom Corner with a route planned through Downtown to the City-County Building. Speaking through a megaphone, Miracle Jones urged allies to work to support Black transgender people. “It doesn’t matter if the law says you can’t get fired for being trans if you aren’t hiring trans people,” Jones said after the demonstration. On Monday, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that gay and transgender workers are entitled to workplace protection under the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Before the ruling, Pennsylvania employers were not barred from firing LGBTQ employees for their orientation or identity. Last Friday, about 200 people joined a march and candlelight vigil in McKeesport for Aaliyah Johnson , a transgender Black woman who died in May. During the COVID-19 pandemic, local LGBTQ organizations have reported an increase in need and a strain on resources . Below are photos from the Pittsburgh Action for Black Trans Lives: Hundreds of demonstrators gathered for a rally and march in support of Black transgender rights on June 18, 2020. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Demonstrators hold signs at protest at Freedom Corner calling for justice for Black transgender people. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Pastor Deryck Tines pours libations for lives lost to police violence as he addresses people at the Pittsburgh Action for Black Trans Lives on June 18, 2020. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Miracle Jones addresses participants at the Pittsburgh Action for Black Trans Lives rally at Freedom Corner on June 18, 2020. (photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Demonstrators hold signs while chanting “Black Trans Lives Matter” during the June 18, 2020 march from Freedom Corner through downtown Pittsburgh. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Demonstrators hold signs while chanting “Black Trans Lives Matter” during the June 18, 2020 march from Freedom Corner through downtown Pittsburgh. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting A banner supporting Black transgender rights leading a June 18, 2020 march from the Hill District through downtown Pittsburgh. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Jay Manning is a visual storyteller/producer for PublicSource. He can be reached at jay@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Jay Manning _migrated-355988-jay@publicsource.org Jay Manning is a visuals fellow at PublicSource. He also works as a freelance videographer and photographer in Pittsburgh. Hailing from South Carolina, he graduated in 2015 from Winthrop University with... More by Jay Manning