Posted in Daily report , posts July 2, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 2, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Harrisburg: Votes cast while key Republicans weren’t there House rules indicate that lawmakers need to be on the floor while votes are cast, but three top state GOP members who weren’t got to cast votes on school-related budget legislation anyway. Pittsburgh: Nonprofits be warned Because Gov. Tom Wolf didn’t sign the budget, the delay could pose problems to nonprofits that receive state funding , including homeless assistance and suicide prevention groups. The last budget delay occurred in 2009, and some nonprofits are still experiencing fallout from it. Pittsburgh: Three-year study shows positive signs for Type 2 diabetes Research has shown that bariatric surgery and lifestyle changes can help control diabetes, but the first long-term study released Tuesday by UPMC shows that surgery combined with significant lifestyle changes can put the disease in full remission after three years. Pittsburgh: Steelers might host Super Bowl in 2023 Art Rooney II and Mayor Bill Peduto discussed the possibility of submitting a bid for the 2023 Super Bowl LVII to be held at Heinz Field. If the Steelers do bid, the winner will be announced in 2019. Allentown: Woman solicits sex, then robs her customer A Craigslist meetup went awry when Kisha Rose Arroyo began fighting with her customer over the cost. She robbed him of $160 at knifepoint, and then forced him to drive to the bank for more. At the bank, the victim called the police, who then arrested Arroyo. State College: New installation on campus The words “We Are” have been commemorated permanently at the university in an installation designed by an alumnus and donated by the class of 2013. NATIONAL The mentally ill make up a quarter of the death chart The majority of mentally ill victims shot by police are white, male and carrying non-lethal weapons. Police trainees regularly lack education on how to defuse tense situations. They spend nearly 60 hours in firearms training, as opposed to eight hours learning strategies to deal with the mentally ill. Diplomacy restored President Obama announced on Wednesday that ties will formally be restored with Cuba. Both nations will open embassies in each other’s capitals. John Kerry will visit Havana this summer, and will become the first secretary of state to do so since 1945. Investigating airlines The Justice Department is investigating whether an unlawful airline alliance was made to keep the number of available seats low and prices high. IN OTHER NEWS #UrbanOutfittersBeLike… A social media campaign criticizing clothing store Urban Outfitters for overcharging on everyday items produced some priceless tweets . Sorry, Urban Outfitters, that you’re expensive. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI