Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Some states require few checks for armed security guards by Eric Holmberg May 6, 2015 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Security Office Armed security guards don’t go through rigorous background checks, which can lead to devastating consequences, according to two recent stories by Reveal , a project of The Center for Investigative Reporting. The first story recounts what happened to Kijuan Byrd, who was shot and killed by security guard Lukace Kendle outside of Club Lexx, a Miami strip club. Kendle was returning to his pickup truck to fetch his cigarettes when Byrd and his friend were exiting the pickup truck they parked next to Kendle’s. Then Kendle shot Byrd eight times. Kendle had a criminal history, which he disclosed on his armed-guard license application, including driving under the influence, public drunkenness and shoplifting in Pennsylvania, according to the story . However, a mental health examination was not required before he was licensed to carry a gun in his capacity as a security guard. Those convictions could have disqualified Kendle as an armed guard. But the state of Florida never found out about them. As Reveal found in a subsequent story , there aren’t many states that require thorough background checks when licensing armed security guards. Several states use the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s fingerprint-based background check. Although more precise in many ways, it does not search for mental health commitments, restraining orders or other records that would prevent the applicants from carrying a gun. According to Reveal , only 11 states use the FBI’s prohibited possessor check, which is run when a person purchases a gun from a federally-licensed gun dealer. Federal law prohibits widespread use of the prohibited possessor database. But, according to the FBI, it’s allowed under certain circumstances, such as for some kinds of firearm purchases or vetting someone for a firearms-related permit. Pennsylvania is one of four states that requires a mental health evaluation for armed security guards, just like police officers. California currently has a bill in the works to require mental health evaluations of armed guards in the state. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @holmberges . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Criminal Justice