Posted in Equity Black Lives Matter protests in small-town southwestern Pennsylvania: We mapped dozens of locations. by Juliette Rihl and Mark Kramer July 14, 2020 July 14, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Millions of people across the U.S. have participated in anti-racism demonstrations over the death of George Floyd. The New York Times tracked the scale of the movement and concluded that it may be one of the biggest in U.S. history. PublicSource staff and freelance partners have covered a lot of racial justice marches in the city of Pittsburgh over the course of two months. But to capture a more comprehensive picture of the scale, we asked local reporter Mark Kramer to explore the extent of the Black Lives Matter movement in our region’s small towns. It’s not a secret that our region is among the most fragmented, with more than 100 police departments in Allegheny County alone, and even more municipalities. Mark went to a handful of protests in these towns and covered them in his story . To show the scale of the movement in our region, we’ve mapped dozens of towns that held anti-racism rallies. If you know of a southwestern Pennsylvania town that had a Black Lives Matter protest but we haven’t included it here, please send us a note with a location to info@publicsource.org and a link to an event on social media or an article covering the protest. Mark Kramer is a freelance writer and creative writing teacher based in Pittsburgh. He can be reached at mark@mnkramer.com . Juliette Rihl is a reporter for PublicSource. She can be reached at juliette@publicsource.org. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Juliette Rihl juliette@publicsource.org Juliette Rihl reports on criminal justice, public safety and mental health for PublicSource. Her 2020 series on how court debt impacts low-income Allegheny County residents prompted the county to join... More by Juliette Rihl