Posted in Inside our Newsroom Support transparency. Support truth. This Sunshine Week, support PublicSource. by Halle Stockton March 16, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X It’s Sunshine Week — the perfect time to talk about why transparency matters. Public records and open government aren’t just buzzwords; they’re the foundation of accountability. At PublicSource, we dig into the details that shape our communities and break down policies that impact daily life. Here’s a look at some of our reporting that cuts through the noise and brings critical information to light: Feb. 11, 2025: Is Allegheny County’s “500-in-500” push hitting its marks for housing people? Dec. 19, 2024: One year later, most Innamorato transparency pledges are still “under consideration.” March 4, 2024: How Pittsburgh-based EQT’s expansion in West Virginia set four families reeling, while state regulators trusted the company to answer their complaints. Feb. 14, 2024: The option of in-person attendance returns after PublicSource seeks access to meetings of public agencies that have remained in virtual-only mode. Aug. 8, 2023: Inside the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection’s monitoring of the Shell petrochemical complex in Beaver County. Today also marks the beginning of our spring fundraising campaign. We’ve set a goal of raising $7,000 by March 31, and we’re counting on readers like you to help us make more stories like this possible. Show that you value the public’s right to know by making a donation to our nonprofit newsroom today. And we have a limited-time offer: Start a recurring gift of any amount before March 31 , and you’ll receive this beautiful wood-burned bookmark , made by our friends at HackPGH ! You’ll keep track of your page — and help us keep track of what’s going on in our region. Thank you for your readership, and for helping to make our work possible. Start a recurring gift Make a one-time gift Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton