Posted in DATA , Local Government , SALARIES DATA Find out how much Pennsylvania paid state employees in 2017. Take our quiz. by J. Dale Shoemaker and Natasha Khan April 4, 2018 April 10, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X At times, government may seem like a black hole with little transparency on how your tax dollars are being spent. That’s why shedding light on how the state of Pennsylvania spends your money is a top priority of ours. As we have been since 2014, PublicSource requested and is publishing data on the salaries that state government employees earned in 2017. All told, those figures account for several billion dollars of taxpayer money. Our data includes the agency an employee works for, when they were hired, their annual salary and the overtime they earned. It also includes any payouts an employee received for leaving their job. We received the data from the state’s Executive Office. Unlike other governmental entities, that office does not release race and gender information for individual employees. Instead, the office provided aggregate breakdowns of race and gender of its employees by department. As of June 30, 2017, when the state’s last fiscal year ended, white men made up 52.9 percent of the workforce; white women accounted for 32.2 percent; and men and women of color were 14.5 percent. This year, we’re breaking down the salaries data with an interactive surprise: It’s all in the form of a quiz for a fun way to learn how your tax dollars are spent. We conducted our data analysis with the help of a Jupyter Notebook, which you can find here . For the first time, we’re making our notes and data analysis public so, feel free to check our work! If you have any questions about the data, let us know. *Note: Quiz answers will appear above the choices as you click. Also note that our team loves animals so have fun with the gifs below! This data story was fact-checked by Eric Holmberg. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan