Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Rate of pedestrian fatalities unchanged over 10 years by PublicSource contributor January 5, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X pedestrians Deaths caused by car accidents in Pennsylvania decreased from 2004 to 2013, but the rate of pedestrian fatalities remained steady. Using National Highway Traffic Safety Administration data, the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review reports that Pennsylvania had 147 pedestrian deaths in 2013. That’s 12 percent of all traffic deaths in the state, a minimal increase of 0.01 percent over 10 years. The Trib reports that municipalities throughout the city each maintain their own methods for pedestrian and bicycle safety. In Oakland, sidewalks are fenced and pedestrians are forced to cross at intersections. In Mt. Lebanon, a $65,000 project installed in-road lights at a busy crosswalk that alerts motorists to pedestrians. However, Ross Township, specifically McKnight Road, is an area that can improve safety for bicyclists, pedestrians and motorists. According to the Trib , the commercial stretch of the road lacks sidewalks between sections. Buses drop off shoppers on the shoulder of the highway. A Ross Township spokesman told the Trib that they are seeking grants to build new infrastructure aimed at improving safety and accessibility for all travelers, especially those without cars. Funding comes from federal, state and city sources. According to the article: Pennsylvania’s transportation infrastructure funding bill, passed in 2013, established a multimodal grant program to fund street and sidewalk improvements. The program will allocate up to $40 million by July 2016. The 10-county Southwest Pennsylvania Commission issued $3.45 million in federal Transportation Alternative Program grants in 2014. Some went toward street improvement programs in Pittsburgh, Kittanning, Zelienople, Etna and Upper St. Clair. Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto implemented a Complete Streets policy in early 2015 that will guide the design and development of public rights of way for people moving around in the city. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The Trib article notes that protected bike lanes, designated parking lanes and countdown timers at intersections are becoming the norm in the city. Pittsburgh’s downtown may also see some changes geared toward opening spaces for pedestrian crowds. A firm hired to study public space in downtown is slated to release its recommendations later this month. Reach Stephanie Roman at sroman@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @ShogunSteph . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Infrastructure , Transportation