Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Another round of DEP tests shows safe radioactivity levels in Southwestern Pennsylvania streams by Natasha Khan May 18, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A second round of water sampling by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection on Ten Mile Creek and an abandoned coal mine that feeds into it has found radioactivity levels are within safe drinking water limits. The results were nearly identical to samples taken last year and show radioactivity at normal levels, John Poister, a DEP spokesman, wrote in an email. The DEP investigation into the creek was sparked by concerns voiced by local environmental groups. Ten Mile Creek is a major tributary of the Monongahela River in Greene and Washington counties. The river is a major source of drinking water in the region. As PublicSource previously reported , tests for radiological materials taken by the DEP on the creek and Clyde Mine in April 2014 caused concern in the community because they showed extremely high levels. For those original samples, the DEP said it used an imprecise method, which likely skewed results, but are now using more sensitive, methods approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in its sampling efforts. Community concerns also prompted local researchers to test the creek further. West Virginia University scientists tested the creek and mine water last year for radioactive materials and found safe levels. Poister said DEP officials are taking samples at several times of the year when the stream is experiencing different water flow levels. He said a third round of samples that were taken in April are currently being analyzed. He expects to have those results sometime in June. There will be a final round of sampling in the fall, and those results should be released early next year, he said. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org or 412-515-0063. Follow her on Twitter @khantasha . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan