Posted in DEVELOP PGH Pittsburgh Urban Redevelopment Authority announces its executive director will be stepping down by Tom Lisi April 9, 2019 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Urban Redevelopment Authority Executive Director Rob Rubinstein (right) and URA board member Rep. Ed Gainey (left). (Photo by Kat Procyk/PublicSource) Robert Rubinstein, the executive director and 30-year veteran of the Pittsburgh Urban Redevelopment Authority [URA], will step down in the coming months. Rubinstein will stay on in a leadership role after the authority’s board of directors hires his replacement, URA Board Chair Sam Williamson said Tuesday. URA Chief Communications Officer Gigi Saladna said Rubinstein is stepping down for personal reasons. He is not accepting interviews about the move. Williamson, who served as board chair since February, said Rubinstein has “been a real asset to this city and the organization in the decades that he’s been there.” “I’m sure it was a difficult but personal decision that Robert made,” Williamson said, “that he wanted in this stage of his career and life to move into a different role.” The URA is a city authority that has managed public efforts to redevelop brownfields and neighborhoods in Pittsburgh. Rubinstein was named executive director in February 2017 but has served in the position in an interim capacity since 2012. In that time, he has overseen the creation, implementation and management of more than 20 Tax Increment Financing (TIF) districts, according to a URA press release. In a TIF district, incremental real estate tax revenue can be used to pay for public or private improvements associated with a development. The URA is in the midst of completing a new strategic plan with HR&A Advisors, a consulting firm that contracted with the city on its bid proposal for Amazon’s HQ2 competition. Williamson said the plan will likely come out this summer. Among the URA’s main initiatives is the rollout of the inaugural $10 million for Pittsburgh’s Housing Opportunity Fund, which is funded by real estate transfer taxes. Williamson said he doesn’t expect the URA’s recent focus on affordable housing and equitable development to change. Mayor Bill Peduto praised Rubinstein in an emailed statement. “I want to thank [Rubinstein] for his years of leadership on behalf of city residents, communities and businesses, and his dedication to URA staff,” Peduto said in the statement. “Pittsburgh wouldn’t be what it is today without him. I look forward to working with Robert in his new role.” The mayor’s office declined to provide additional comment. Tom Lisi is PublicSource’s Develop PGH reporter. You can reach him at 412-368-6480 or by email at tom@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Develop PGH has been made possible with funding from The Heinz Endowments. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Urban Redevelopment Authority Tom Lisi tom@publicsource.org Tom Lisi is the Developing Pittsburgh reporter at PublicSource. His beat focuses on issues related to economic development, housing and city planning. Previously, Tom worked as a city and special projects... More by Tom Lisi