Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan October 9, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Derailments attributed to faulty tracks​ Nearly 60 percent of derailments for trains hauling crude oil and ethanol since 2013 were caused by problems with tracks, according to an analysis by the LA Times . That’s more than double the overall rate for freight train accidents, the newspaper found. More on Mount Carbon crash Tests performed two months prior to a derailment in Mount Carbon, W.V., on Feb. 16 showed a rail defect, according to a federal report . However, neither the railroad nor the company that did the testing addressed the issue and the rail broke, which led to the derailment . Federal authorities are releasing new track standards in response to the incident. Judge approves crash settlement Families of victims of the 2013 Lac-Mégantic, Quebec, crash are getting a $338 million settlement . Forty-seven people died in the accident when a runaway crude oil train crashed in the middle of the city’s downtown. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Oil train derails in Lynchburg, Va. A CSX train carrying empty oil tank cars derailed after its engine and first car skipped the tracks. No one was hurt, and the police department said the incident was “minimal.” Last year, another CSX oil train carrying 105 cars derailed near the same location and 30,000 gallons of crude oil spilled into the James River. Reach Elaina Zachos at ezachos@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan