Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource CEO departs The news organization’s board will contemplate the future of its organizational structure starting immediately, while news coverage will be unchanged. by Charlie Wolfson and Rich Lord January 23, 2023 January 24, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource CEO Eric Zack has left the news organization, its board of directors said Monday. Ted Anthony, the board president, described Zack’s departure after nine months as a personnel matter and declined to provide details. “We’re very glad to have had him and thank him very much for the time that he spent here,” Anthony said. Zack, who began as CEO in May, did not comment Monday. PublicSource will be led in an interim capacity by its editor-in-chief, Halle Stockton, and director of revenue and operations, Jennie Liska. Zack’s departure does not reflect any financial weakness at the organization, board member Zak Thomas said. Anthony added that the decision will not impact the organization’s mission or the journalism it provides readers. Board members did not say when they expect to hire a new leader or what the search process will entail, but they said that a board meeting was scheduled for Monday night to begin discussion of that topic. Zack joined PublicSource after working as director of university relations at The Conversation, a nonprofit independent news organization. He was PublicSource’s first CEO. Prior to Zack’s arrival, Mila Sanina served for five years as executive director. She left to focus on her well-being and has subsequently worked as a professor and as a freelance writer for PublicSource, among other roles. Following Sanina’s departure, Stockton and Liska led PublicSource on an interim basis, as they are now. Stockton has served as PublicSource’s editor-in-chief since May. Prior to that, she served as managing editor for seven years, and before that as a reporter for PublicSource for three years and for the Sarasota Herald-Tribune in Florida for four years. Liska has served as PublicSource’s director of revenue and operations since 2018. She builds corporate and community relationships to support the growth of PublicSource. She previously spent 13 years working in management and technology consulting. She also served on PublicSource’s Board of Directors from 2016 to 2018. PublicSource, founded in 2011, grew from a project within Pittsburgh Filmmakers to an independent nonprofit with a full-time staff of 15. The organization is guided by a 14-member board of directors including veterans of media, marketing, technology, education, medicine, law, human resources, finance and communications. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Board members said Monday that as they chart the organization’s path forward, they hope to grow their own ranks to between 15 and 20 and become more diverse as a body to “represent all of Pittsburgh.” Those interested in joining the board can read about its role and apply here . Charlie Wolfson is PublicSource’s local government reporter and a Report for America corps member. He can be reached at charlie@publicsource.org or at @chwolfson on Twitter. Rich Lord is PublicSource’s managing editor. He can be reached at rich@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow , Pittsburgh Charlie Wolfson charlie@publicsource.org x Charlie Wolfson is an enterprise reporter for Pittsburgh's Public Source, focusing on local government accountability and politics in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. He was a Report for America corps... More by Charlie Wolfson Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord