Posted in Daily report , posts May 28, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 28, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Butler County: Former PA senator Rick Santorum announces bid for presidency Santorum ran in 2012 and he’s back to attempt again , joining the current pool of six GOP candidates. Santorum made the announcement Wednesday in Butler, and is scheduled to kick off a tour in Iowa today. State College: Kappa Delta Rho disbanded for three years Penn State tripled the initial punishment for the fraternity after discovering other misconduct during an investigation into its Facebook page that contained photos of nude, unconscious women. Pittsburgh: The inequality of the Pittsburgh Promise Black male high schoolers are half as likely as other major student groups to receive the $40,000 Pittsburgh Promise scholarship. The Promise is offered to students in the city’s public schools with strong academic and attendance records to use toward post-secondary education. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh’s top earners Chancellor Patrick Gallagher doesn’t appear on the university’s public list of highest-paid employees because he hasn’t yet worked for a full year, but we know he was  paid less than head basketball coach Jamie Dixon (at $3 million) and former head football coach Paul Chryst (at $1.65 million). Allentown: Police officers suspended Three South Whitehall Township police officers were suspended , one also demoted, for violating township police policy. Allegations include neglect, intemperance and disobedience of orders. NATIONAL FIFA gets a red card from the U.S. Attorney General As of Wednesday, indictments abound in the case of alleged U.S.-based corruption by FIFA soccer officials. FIFA officials are accused of racketeering, wire fraud and money laundering through the U.S. banking system and to have accepted bribes on U.S. soil. IRS reports breach of information on 100,000 tax returns Hackers accessed the Internal Revenue Service’s “Get Transcript” service using stolen personal data from February through mid-May, but the IRS didn’t notice any suspicious activity until last week. Court of Appeals continues blocking Obama’s immigration laws President Obama’s executive action to reform immigration laws by blocking deportation and offering work permits to undocumented immigrants will be put on hold. On Wednesday, Justice Department officials announced they would not appeal to the Supreme Court, and would wait to make a stronger argument. Ford recalls vehicles for power steering failure About 423,000 Ford, Lincoln and Mercury models are being recalled for sudden electrical malfunction that causes the power steering to switch to manual. ‘Forest Mondays’ revolutionized one kindergarten class Ottauquechee School in Vermont started a program where a class spends the entire day outside in the woods, regardless of rain, shine or snow. It doesn’t yield quantifiable data, but its benefits show in other ways, like the health and happiness of the students. IN OTHER NEWS ‘Minecraft’ video game funds stem cell research A 24-hour “Minecraft” marathon, to be held June 6, will benefit the National Stem Cell Foundation . Top “Minecraft” players will log a total of 10,000 hours for charity. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.