Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 18, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 18, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: U.S Steel lays off workers at downtown headquarters An undisclosed number of white collar workers will be laid off at the U.S. Steel Corp. downtown because of the weak demand for steel. Pittsburgh: Wilkinsburg set to close its grades 7-12 school building Wilkinsburg Public School District announced its middle and high school students could be moved to Westinghouse 6-12 next year, but the plan is still pending approval from both districts. In a joint movement, the 200-plus students would be considered part of the Pittsburgh Public School District. Pittsburgh: Penguins partner with Peoples Natural Gas The Pittsburgh Penguins and Peoples Natural Gas announced a partnership Thursday that will give the natural gas company naming rights to the Fifth Avenue and Washington Place entrance at Consol Energy Center. Peoples will also donate $10 to the Dollar Energy Fund for every shot on goal the team has this season, a program called “Shots for Warmth.” California: Cal U cuts back in wake of $5.4 million budget deficit California University of Pennsylvania will cut travel expenses and leave unfilled jobs open in the midst of a $5.4 million budget deficit for this academic year. The university faced a 1.5 percent decrease in enrollment, or 124 fewer students, than last term. Greencastle: Franklin County representative targets Planned Parenthood Rep. Paul Schemel, a first-term Republican representative, said he is sponsoring legislation that would encourage primary care offices to provide family planning counseling in underserved areas. That would support efforts to cut Planned Parenthood funding in Pennsylvania. NATIONAL GM will pay $900 million to settle charges for faulty ignition switches General Motors’ flawed ignition switches have been tied to at least 124 deaths, and the company will pay $900 million to settle. Problems that could occur include disabled airbags, power steering and a shut-off of cars while driving. GM admitted that employees were aware of the problems almost a decade before they recalled the millions of vehicles. Death toll raises to five in California Wildfires Two more bodies were found in the burn zone of the two raging California wildfires Thursday, and they are still only 35 percent contained. Dubbed the Valley Fire, it has burned close to 600 homes, and was possibly caused by a Pacific Gas and Electric Company power line , according to the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. Trump links autism to vaccines in GOP debate The CNN moderator at Wednesday’s GOP debate asked former neurosurgeon Ben Carson if Donald Trump should stop connecting vaccines to autism. Carson denied any relationship between the two, but the exchange sparked comments from both autism groups and doctors . World Summer months reach highest temperatures ever worldwide June, July and August beat records for earth’s hottest temperatures , according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. This year is likely to break 136 years of recorded temperatures. IN OTHER NEWS New photos of dwarf planet Pluto revealed NASA released a panoramic photograph exhibiting the mountains and plains of the icy dwarf planet Pluto. The photo was taken from a flyby of the New Horizons spacecraft. The daily report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI