Posted in Education Pittsburgh Public Schools delay start date to Sept. 8 by Lauren Davidson August 30, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photo via iStock) Pittsburgh Public Schools announced Saturday night that students’ start date will be pushed back until Tuesday, Sept. 8, due to delays in the arrival of technological devices needed for e-learning. School was set to start Monday, Aug. 31, with all students participating in e-learning for the first nine weeks. In a press release, PPS said the decision was “due to unexpected delays caused by continued technology supply chain shortages across the country.” “Up to 7,000 devices are expected to arrive by the end of next week to fulfill outstanding need,” the release said. The district is providing computers to all students who do not have access to one at home. Distribution will be announced as devices arrive. A robocall to families Saturday night initially stated school would begin on Monday, Sept. 8. Monday, Sept. 7 is Labor Day. A second robocall corrected the error. Should more delays arise, PPS said that the district will work with staff to ensure materials are in place for students. Adjustments to the school calendar to make up for the lost days will be made based on a survey of staff and families. Thousands of devices have already been ordered or exchanged if previous devices were not outfitted for e-learning. As of Thursday, 6,440 devices ordered in the spring had been exchanged or distributed. On Friday and Saturday, 1,200 devices were distributed to students in grades 2-5. PPS has asked families that have access to a device at home to use that device until more devices are received by late October. Compatible devices include personal desktop and laptop computers and tablets (iPad, Kindle, Nook, etc.). For information on how to use personal home devices to log into the District’s learning management system, families can visit www.pghschools.org/elearning . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI