Posted in On the beat , posts Pittsburgh named a finalist in national transportation challenge by Sabrina Bodon March 15, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pittsburgh is on a quest to become the country’s first “Smart City.” The city got word over the weekend that Pittsburgh is among seven finalists advancing in the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Smart City Challenge to expand transportation performance by enhancing “safety, mobility, sustainability, economic vitality, and address climate change” according to the department [DOT] . Seventy-eight mid-sized cities with between 250,000 to 800,000 residents applied for the $40 million grant. “Smart Cities is not just about promoting the latest transportation and energy related technology,” Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto said in a press release Tuesday . “It’s about applying those efforts to improve the lives of everyday Pittsburghers…” The proposal from Pittsburgh was built through a partnership between the City of Pittsburgh and the Allegheny County Port Authority, Carnegie Mellon University [CMU], the University of Pittsburgh and numerous community and nonprofit stakeholders, according to the Peduto’s press release. Pittsburgh’s proposal highlights the establishment of “smart spines,” which the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reports will assemble travel information to provide new services to the city. Pittsburgh’s bid calls for creating adaptive transportation systems using “smart spines” that gather transportation data using sensors in major transportation corridors. That information would be used to develop new transportation options for underserved neighborhoods, improve safety and provide better information for travelers. Pittsburgh would act as a pilot for “smart spines,” situating the city as a “testbed for future transportation technologies,” according to the city press release. A PublicSource article last month explored the advances Pittsburgh has already made in the transportation business, highlighting autonomous cars being developed and researched in the city through a partnership between Uber and CMU. If self-driving cars were to become the norm, the city would likely need to upgrade and standardize traffic signals and redesign intersections to allow for streamlined performance by the cars. Peduto, making mention of these technology advancements by CMU, said that even if Pittsburgh is not chosen in the challenge, the city will continue to move forward with these developments, according to the Post-Gazette . Pittsburgh was joined by Austin, Columbus, Denver, Kansas City, Portland and San Francisco as the finalists. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The seven finalist cities have been awarded $100,000 to fine-tune their proposals, which are due in in April. The winner will be chosen in June. The winner will receive not only the $40 million in funding from the DOT, but also $10 million from Microsoft co-founder Paul G. Allen’s investment company, Vulcan, and $1 million in credits from Amazon Web Services to be used in its cloud and professional Services. “This is where the world is going,” Peduto said, according to the Post-Gazette . “The question is, will Pittsburgh be a leader?” Reach PublicSource intern Sabrina Bodon at sbodon@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Transportation