Donation/Membership FAQ If you have general questions about our organization, visit our About page . What does being a “member” mean? If someone has given any amount within the past 365 days, we refer to them as a member. Their support makes everything we do possible — we couldn’t do this work without them! Read our Impact Report, showing just some of what our members recently helped power, here . Can my gift be made anonymously? In accordance with our editorial independence policy, we make all gifts over $1,000 public. More information about our editorial independence policy and data privacy policy can be found here . Are gifts to Public Source tax-deductible? Yes! We are a 501(c)3 organization, and all donations made to us are tax-deductible as allowed by law. We encourage you to contact a professional adviser for specific advice on claiming deductions. Does my contribution influence coverage? No. We subscribe to INN’s standards of editorial independence. Read more about our policy here . What are the benefits of being a member? Access to our exclusive member newsletter, offering behind-the-scenes information, sneak peeks of upcoming projects and events, and more. Optional member thank you gifts: Public Source T-shirt or tote bag (with $75 one-time or $7/month recurring gift); one-year digital New York Times subscription (with $200 one-time or $17/month recurring gift); a free digital ad for the 501(c)(3) organization of your choice (gift of $1,000 or greater). Occasional access to special members-only events or surprises. Keeping our paywall-free journalism available for others in our region who cannot afford to support it. How can I make a gift? Give securely online using a credit or debit card. Click here to make your gift now. Give via PayPal. Mail a check: Checks can be made payable to Public Source and mailed to 1936 Fifth Ave. Pittsburgh PA 15219. So that we can properly credit you, please include your email address with your check. Make a gift of stock. Contact Director of Membership and Development Alyia Paulding for more information. Qualified Charitable Distributions from IRAs: If you are required to make a minimum distribution from your IRA, choosing to make a charitable contribution may have tax benefits. We encourage you to speak with your financial adviser about this option. Why do you ask for my phone number? Because most people get so much email, we’ve found that having a phone number on file is often the best way to get in contact if we have a question about a donation. Your phone number is not shared. I have a recurring donation. How can I update or cancel it? Many changes can be made through our self-service contributor portal. To access the portal: Go to this link and enter the email address used to start your donation. Check your email for a message titled “Manage Your Contributions” from News Revenue Hub. (If you don’t see it, please check your spam/junk folders as well.) Click the button in that email that says “Manage Contributions,” and a webpage will load in your browser with a portal showing your donations. Click the “recurring” tab to see your donation details. To change the credit card on file for your recurring donation: In the contributor portal, click on your recurring donation, and a billing details window will load. Click “Change payment method,” update the card information, and click “save.” You’ll receive an email confirming the changes, and the next contribution will process to your new card. To change the amount of your recurring donation: In the contributor portal, click on your recurring donation, and a billing details window will load. Click “Change billing details,” update the amount of your gift, and click “save.” You’ll receive an email confirming the changes, and the next contribution will process at your new amount. To cancel your recurring donation: In the contributor portal, click on your recurring donation, and a billing details window will load. Scroll to the bottom and click “cancel contribution.” You’ll receive an email confirming the cancellation, and no further recurring gifts will be processed. If you have further questions, please contact Operations and Membership Coordinator Lee Hood , and she’ll be happy to assist you. Can I receive a replacement acknowledgment for a past donation? Absolutely. Contact Operations and Membership Coordinator Lee Hood and she’ll be happy to assist you. How can I support Public Source in other ways? Tell a friend : Most people find out about us through word of mouth, so sharing a story with someone who cares about our region or inviting them to sign up for our newsletters is hugely helpful! It’s also wonderful to share your support or a Public Source story you valued on your social media. Host a house party : Invite some friends over to talk about what’s going on in Pittsburgh and how journalism can support a better Pittsburgh with members of our staff. We’re happy to help you plan. Contact Director of Membership and Development Alyia Paulding for more information. Contribute to our match pool : We offer donors a match for their gifts in our June and December campaigns, and your contribution to this pool can help your support go twice as far! If you’re interested in participating, contact Director of Membership and Development Alyia Paulding . Advertise with us : We’re a great way to reach engaged Pittsburghers. More information is available here . See if your employer will match your gift to us : Many employers will double — or even triple — contributions their employees make to charitable organizations, helping your gift go even further. Talk with your employer’s HR department to see if you can take advantage of this benefit. If your employer requires our EIN number to match a gift, please use 47-4309256. I’m a current member, but I’m getting fundraising solicitations. What’s going on? We limit the number of times we ask current members to give — usually only when a match or special opportunity is available, or when their membership is about to expire. If you are receiving regular solicitations (or the newsletter says you’re not a member), we most likely have more than one email on file for you. We’d be happy to update our records; reach out to Operations and Membership Coordinator Lee Hood for assistance. How do I opt-out of fundraising solicitations? Contact Operations and Membership Coordinator Lee Hood , and she’ll be happy to assist you. You may also use the link at the bottom of fundraising emails to be removed from solicitations. Who can I speak to if I have other questions or need more help? Contact Operations and Membership Coordinator Lee Hood , and she’ll be happy to assist you. About Public Source About Newsletters Contact us Send tips & ideas Advertise with us Donate Membership FAQs Republishing guidelines Our partners Board of Directors Jobs Working with us