Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Is climate change real? Many Americans say ‘no’ by Natasha Khan November 25, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X About one-fifth of Americans don’t believe climate change exists, according to a new survey by Yale University researchers. The survey found that the majority of people in the United States, 63 percent, think climate change is occurring—a number that have gone relatively unchanged over the last five years—and 18 percent believe it isn’t. But 97 percent or more of climate scientists agree: Climate change is real and is very likely caused by human activity. Only about one in 10 Americans understands that scientific consensus, the survey found. And about 52 percent think that climate change is mostly human caused. So what is causing this divide? Well, there’s no one-size-fits-all answer, but the Yale researchers say it could be communications failures — some of them by the media. “One reason these numbers have been stable in recent years may be because most Americans are not hearing or talking about this issue,” authors wrote in the report . “Our survey finds, for example, that only 40 percent of the American public says they hear about global warming in the media at least once a month and only 19 percent hear about it at least once a week. Furthermore, only 16 percent of people surveyed say that they hear people they know talk about climate change at least once a month, and only 4 percent reported hearing other people talk about it at least once a week. And 74 percent “rarely” or “never” discuss climate change with family or friends. The survey found that at least two-thirds of Americans are at least “a little interested” in hearing about climate change — but only 11 percent said they’re “very” interested. Some researchers think scientists are not effectively communicating climate research to the general public. From the Christian Science Monitor : Alan Leshner, chief executive officer of the [American Association for the Advancement of Science], said in the journal Science that scientists tend to inform the public about research on climate change via large forums rather than in smaller settings , where more specific questions could be answered. “The way to do that is not to have big town hall meetings where everybody’s lecturing but rather to meet in smaller groups and have sessions that go through this,” he told ClimateWire. “I myself have frequently met with community clubs, religious groups, retirement communities and tried to have these kind of discussions as opposed to monologues.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Other researchers suggest fossil fuel industry public relations campaigns aimed at downplaying climate change are taking a toll. [Henry Pollack, a retired professor of geophysics at the University of Michigan and a winner of the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize] said this has been seen in the past, when corporations and the scientists they hired denied the effects of tobacco and toxic waste. “There’s been a deluge of misinformation that confuses the issue in the mind of the public,” he told Voice Newspapers. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan