Posted in Environment , PUBLIC SAFETY What you can do to prepare in case of a disaster of any kind by Alexandra Kanik December 15, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Have a family emergency plan Make sure everyone knows where the exits are in your house, workplace or school. Decide how you will contact each other. Have a meeting place everyone knows in case you can’t go home. See more suggestions at this link . Have a communications plan Pick a person for everyone to contact in case you can’t get in touch with each other. A family member or someone out of town might be reachable if cell phones are down in a disaster area (which happened in New York City on 9/11). Equip everyone with contact cards with phone numbers for parents, neighbors, siblings and out-of-state relatives (here’s a template for emergency cards for kids and a template for parents.) If you’re not in immediate danger, think about texting instead of calling. Text messages can sometimes get through during emergencies more quickly than cell-phone calls. Make a 72-hour kit for your family Include things such as water (one gallon per person, per day), at least a three-day supply of food and flashlights. (See a full kit list here .) Source: the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Ready campaign, at Ready.gov FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy , Resource , Transportation