2011 military photographer of the year – Part 1 Military photographers throughout the world compete each year for the best feature photos, photo stories, combat photography and other categories. Here are some of the winners of this year’s contest. Hover to view image caption. Staff Sgt. Angel Alvarez assigned to the Warrior Training Center on Fort Lee, Va., gets ready to throw a pyrotechnic grenade simulator into the sky during a night fire event for the 2011 Department of the Army Best Warrior Competition. (Photo by Sgt. Sean K. Harp) U.S. Marines and Afghan National Army soldiers cross a makeshift bridge during Operation Godfather in Durzay, Afghanistan, Jan. 14, 2011. (Photo by Sgt. Christopher R. Rye) A candidate from Officer Candidate School swims through icy waters during the Quigley in order to complete a combat course at Marine Corps Base Quantico, Va., Jan., 29, 2011. The Quigley involves going through obstacles in water that includes a full immersion underwater. (Photo by LCpl. Christina O’Neil) Tech. Sgt. Milo Hinson, 3rd Combat Camera Squadron, uses a flash light while shooting a Berretta 9mm during the night-fire portion of Advance Weapons, Tactics and Techniques training Oct. 4, 2011, San Antonio, Texas. During night-fire training, Airmen learn how to tactically illuminate targets with flash lights and practice the use of night vision goggles. (Photo by SSgt. Jonathan E. Snyder) Senior Airman John Fitzgerald, medic attached to Laghman Provincial Reconstruction Team, hangs a bag of fluids to give to Staff Sgt. Jason Roberts, to keep him hydrated during a multi-day operation Aug. 21 in Alingar District, Laghman Province. (Photo by SSgt. Ryan C. Crane) As the snow falls in Nangarhar Province, Afghanistan, U.S. Army Spc. David A. Brooks, a chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear specialist from Virginia Beach, Va., provides security during a convoy. (Photo by SFC Mark C. Burrell) Sgt. Lucas Simmons, team leader attached to Laghman Provincial Reconstruction Team, rides a bike given to him by a local child during a multi-day operation in Alingar District, Laghman Province.  (Photo by SSgt Ryan C. Crane) Service members from the Iraq Air Force security forces and U.S. Air Force security forces show off for each other on the top of a hardened aircraft shelter at Sather Air Base in Baghdad, Iraq, while doing a joint patrol of the flight line. (Photo by SSgt. Joshua L. DeMotts) Other slideshows to view: Images of Service 2011 military photographer of the year – Part 2 About Public Source About Newsletters Contact us Send tips & ideas Advertise with us Donate Membership FAQs Republishing guidelines Our partners Board of Directors Jobs Working with us