Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts Risk for HIV and hepatitis C outbreaks in drug users concentrated in Appalachia, CDC says by PublicSource contributor June 3, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The risk of HIV and hepatitis C outbreaks among drug users burst into the national spotlight last year after an HIV outbreak in a small Indiana town. Over the course of a year, 30 HIV cases ballooned to more than 190 infections attributed to intravenous drug use. A new Centers for Disease Control and Prevention preliminary report has determined that 220 counties in the United States are at risk for similar outbreaks. Many of those counties were rural and more than half were in West Virginia, Kentucky and Tennessee, according to The Wall Street Journal . The remaining counties were distributed across 22 states and the District of Columbia. Three Pennsylvania counties — Luzerne, Cambria and Crawford — were listed as vulnerable to HIV and hepatitis C outbreaks among people who inject drugs. Luzerne County was the most vulnerable Pennsylvania county, ranked 38 out of the 220. The report only points to the potential for an HIV or hepatitis C outbreak, not actual incidents, and only pertains to injection drug users. The report used “nationally available data that have been shown to be strong predictors of recent unsterile injection drug use,” according to CDC spokesman Paul Fulton Jr. The research found that some of the variables that best predicted acute hepatitis C infections were the percentage of white, non-Hispanic residents in an area, drug overdose death rates, income and unemployment. One proposed method to fight the spread of HIV and hepatitis C infections through drug use is to implement clean needle exchange programs. Last year, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence authorized a short-term needle exchange after the crisis in Austin. Pennsylvania prohibits the distribution of syringes to inject illegal drugs , though officials in Allegheny County and Philadelphia publicly support needle exchange programs, allowing needle exchanges to operate without prosecution. The state has seen an increase in hepatitis C infections. From 2010 to 2012, Pennsylvania’s acute cases of hepatitis C more than doubled , though the state didn’t name a cause for the increase. Pennsylvania’s Department of Human Services Medicaid program has seen the treatment costs for hepatitis C jump from $33.7 million to $138.1 million in the past two years. Reach Iain Oldman at ioldman@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Drug abuse and rehabilitation