Posted in Daily report , posts June 6, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 6, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X By Stephanie Roman | PublicSource | June 6, 2015 PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Scammers calling Residents in Peters Township should be aware of any suspicious calls or letters asking for personal information, like Social Security numbers. The Internal Revenue Service will not leave urgent callback messages on the phone, nor will they call without sending a bill in the mail first. Pittsburgh: Air quality could be a problem for bikers Pittsburgh consistently ranks in the 10 worst cities in the U.S. for air pollution, and while bike commuters are being made safer with the addition of bike lanes, they still ride through heavy smog and vehicle exhaust. Harrisburg: Gov. Wolf delays second death row execution Gov. Tom Wolf promised in February that he would grant reprieve to any death row inmate whose execution fell before the publication of a report by the Pennsylvania Task Force and Advisory Committee on Capital Punishment. On Thursday, Gov. Wolf delayed the death of a convicted killer, leading to a Republican backlash. Allentown: Man arrested for running prostitution ring Cedric Boswell allegedly had four women working for him, and he would schedule sex dates for them and take at least half of the pay. He was also charged with simple assault for slapping one of the women and leaving a bruise. Philadelphia: Beer garden controversy A Philly neighborhood going through gentrification is up in arms over a pop-up beer garden . The pop-up appears in an empty lot in a residential neighborhood, and among other concerns, residents aren’t happy with unaffiliated drunk people roaming the streets outside their homes late at night. Statewide: Fortune 500 companies in PA Fortune magazine’s 61st annual Fortune 500 list hit Friday. Pennsylvania makes a showing with 18 companies in the top 500 and 49 total in the top 1,000. NATIONAL String of recent hacks linked to China Previously, the data of four million government employees was stolen by Chinese hackers , and more recently the health firms Anthem and Premera appeared to have millions of customers’ information stolen. So far, none of the data has been used for identity theft or unauthorized purchases. All of the attacks have been traced to China. Federal investigation launched into Florida hospital St. Mary’s Medical Center in Florida has an 12.5 percent infant mortality rate following open heart surgeries. The institution is now under federal investigation. U.S. economy grew by 280,000 jobs in May This beat the analysts’ expectations , but the unemployment rate grew as well, to 5.5 percent. IN OTHER NEWS The possibility of a Triple Crown winner Today’s the big day: Will American Pharoah become the first horse in 37 years to win the Triple Crown? In the field of eight horses, he’s the overwhelming favorite, with starting odds of 3-5. A deer named Dragon Dragon is a fawn who’s a little different from the rest — he’s a piebald, with less colored pigment than an average white-tailed deer. He lacks natural camouflage and was rejected by his mother, so he’s been adopted by Deer Tracks Junction in Michigan. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.