Posted in Community storytelling , Equity , FIRST PERSON First-person essay: Why we believe Christine Blasey Ford by Jessie Ramey and Sara Goodkind September 27, 2018 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Sara Goodkind,  an associate professor in the School of Social Work at the University of Pittsburgh (left) and Jessie B. Ramey, director of the Women’s Institute at Chatham University and an associate professor of  Women’s and Gender Studies (right), for a portrait at Chatham University. (Photo by Kat Procyk/PublicSource) Compelling personal stories told by the people living them. We believe Christine Blasey Ford. She’s the professor who has accused Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh of attempted rape. We believe Dr. Blasey – her professional name – because we are both gender scholars and have worked with hundreds of girls and young women who have been sexually assaulted and have not been believed. We teach at two Pittsburgh universities and data shows that more than a quarter of our students have been raped or sexually assaulted. We believe Dr. Blasey because when women bravely come forward, they are often blamed. They are accused of wearing the wrong thing, of being in the wrong place, of asking for it. Victims are also accused of lying. Yet evidence shows that only 2 to 10 percent of rape reports are false accusations, a rate that matches reporting of other types of crimes. Christine Blasey Ford says she screamed for help while Kavanaugh covered her mouth and ripped at her clothing – and she spoke to two different therapists years later because of the trauma. An FBI polygraph test revealed she is telling the truth. But women should not have to take polygraphs to be believed. We believe Dr. Blasey because dismissing Kavanaugh’s alleged actions as a “youthful mistake” is dangerous. That tired old line, “boys will be boys,” suggests we should look the other way because he was 17 and drunk when he is said to have sexually assaulted Ford, who was then 15. But one of us has a 17-year-old son and the other a 15-year-old daughter. Rape culture normalizes sexual violence, tells boys they have a right to girls’ bodies and forces girls to live in constant fear. This thinking harms girls and discredits the wonderful boys and young men we know who are not attempted rapists. “We believe our children. We believe our students. And we believe that we all must listen to and take seriously the testimony of survivors when they bravely speak up…” We believe Dr. Blasey because gender-based violence affects every demographic group and is rampant in our society, as highlighted by the recent #MeToo movement. One in six women in the U.S. has been raped or survived an attempted rape in her lifetime, with Native American women experiencing the greatest risk. Ninety percent of adult rape victims are women, but boys and men are raped and assaulted, too. LGBTQIA+ people are some of the most vulnerable to sexual and gender-based violence, especially trans women of color. And thousands of prisoners are raped and assaulted every year, with an estimated 60 percent of cases perpetrated by jail or prison staff. We believe Dr. Blasey because gender-based violence has long-term impacts. Survivors experience PTSD, depression, suicide and substance abuse; problems with school, work and relationships; and pregnancy and sexually-transmitted infections. Ford’s personal experience of continuing to work through the trauma years later reflects the research literature. She also courageously went public with her story knowing that accusers often have their reputations attacked, their careers undermined, their very lives, homes and families threatened. All of this is happening to her right now. We believe Dr. Blasey because our daughters deserve to be believed and our sons deserve a world where their development as men does not depend on a construction of masculinity premised on gender violence. We believe our children. We believe our students. And we believe that we all must listen to and take seriously the testimony of survivors when they bravely speak up, including Deborah Ramirez and Julie Swetnick, the most recent women to share their stories. Jessie B. Ramey, Ph.D., is the director of the Women’s Institute at Chatham University and an associate professor of  Women’s and Gender Studies. Sara Goodkind, Ph.D., is an associate professor in the School of Social Work at the University of Pittsburgh. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Women's rights 2 replies on “First-person essay: Why we believe Christine Blasey Ford” David George says: October 15, 2018 at 8:32 am This is insane.  Because SOME OTHER WOMEN repress or don’t report their memories of sexual attacks, we should believe this one?  Where is the logic?  First:  Consider that her accusation was carefully couched in terms that made it IMPOSSIBLE TO DISPROVE.  She couldn’t even say for certain what year the imaginary attack occurred in, let alone the place and time.  Second: She clearly lied about several things.  She had no fear of flying, she knew that the Committee was willing to come to California, she lied about the reason for the second front door on her house; she even lied about not wanting the story to become public.  Third: The things she could not produce were very telling.  The very notion that she couldn’t remember how she got home from that party is NOT believable.  She could not drive and it was several miles away from her home.  Fourth: She has two living parents and two siblings, and NONE OF THEM was there to support her, or to testify that she had some sort of life-changing experience after coming home from a party in high school.  Finally, the ridiculous, little-girl voice used at the hearing was simply preposterous.  This is a woman who speaks in public ALL THE TIME.  She has presented papers, spoken at symposia, and so forth.  and she comes to the Committee sounding like a little girl who will faint if anyone says, “Boo” to her.  Not real, not believable.  And because OTHER WOMEN don’t report sex crimes, she should be believed?  Baloney. Robert S says: September 27, 2018 at 9:51 am THIS IS BS AND YOU KNOW IT. Simply harming your own credibility. Why? Comments are closed.