Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts Healthcare innovation threatens anesthesiologists by Halle Stockton May 14, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X New technology could make one of the best-paid medical specialties obsolete. Anesthesiologists, usually the last voice you hear before falling into a deep sleep before surgery, have long been trusted to give just the right amount of potent medications to protect patients from the pain of surgery and lethal overdose. The Sedasys anesthesiology machine is being marketed as a device that can do all that and more, according to a Washington Post story . Johnson & Johnson says its machine may actually be safer for patients because it goes off hard vital stats, not a feeling or hunch of what a patient can sustain. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved the device in 2013. The rollout has been deliberately cautious for a device that hints at the future of health care, when machines take on tasks once assumed beyond their reach. Anesthesiologists — who train for four years after medical school and earn a median annual salary of $277,000 — have lobbied against the machine, according to the Post. Putting someone to sleep is an art, they said. Johnson & Johnson has made some concessions to appease the doctors and the FDA. [The company] won approval by agreeing to have an anesthesiology doctor or nurse on-call in case of emergencies and to limit use to simple screenings such as colonoscopies and endoscopies in healthy patients. “The indication is very narrow, which is comforting to anesthesiologists,” Paul Bruggeman, Sedasys general manager for Johnson & Johnson, said in an interview. The Post reports that 14 million colonoscopies are done every year. Most patients request to be put under because of discomfort caused by the routine procedure. The story compares the sedation cost: about $2,000 for an anesthesiologist and $150 to $200 for the machine. The American College of Anesthesiologists formed a committee to address issues related to the Sedasys machine. Committee co-chair Rebecca Twersky at the SUNY Downstate Medical Center, and colleagues said they doubt the machine will eliminate the specialty. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor “Clearly this is an example of disruptive innovation,” Twersky said. “But,” she added, “we’re not going away.” Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or at hstockton@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @HalleStockton . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton