Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 17, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 17, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Senate healthcare subcommittee addresses heroin epidemic Sens. Bob Casey, a Democrat, and Pat Toomey, a Republican, listened as a panel of experts convened at Allegheny Health Network to address the problems of inappropriate and overprescribing of opioid painkillers , one of heroin’s gateway drugs. Drug Enforcement Administration officials will hire drug diversion investigators in Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh: City Paper’s ‘Best Of’ edition From athletes to drag queens, bars to pet shops and furniture stores to nonprofit organizations, City Paper released its “ Best of Pittsburgh ” annual readers’ poll roundup. Harrisburg: Countdown to AG Kane’s suspension Attorney General Kathleen Kane’s law license goes into indefinite suspension Thursday, and her office staff doesn’t seem to know what her duties will be when that happens. Regardless, Kane can be brought before a judge if there’s disagreement, and she will face opposition from criminal defense lawyers. Harrisburg: Possible fantasy sports limitations Nevada shut down FanDuel and DraftKings Thursday because they don’t have gambling licenses, and now Pennsylvania is considering a similar move. Legislation will go to a House vote next week that would limit fantasy sports to those run by state casinos . Statewide: Gaming funds diverted to charter schools School districts are finding out that the Department of Education is diverting gaming revenue funds to charter schools. The Pennsylvania School Boards Association is calling this unlawful, stating that the gaming funds are for taxpayers , while charter advocates say that charters are lawfully entitled to whatever state funds are available. Statewide: Maximizing Marcellus shale economic impact Gov. Tom Wolf, along with the governors of Ohio and West Virginia, agreed to sign a three-year cooperation plan . The agreement addresses how to implement marketing, workforce development and academic research to bring value to the local economies. NATIONAL Obama reaffirms ties to South Korea At a news conference , President Obama asserted that the U.S.’s ties to South Korea won’t waver at the threat by North Korea; he also addressed the Iran nuclear deal, stating that the U.S. will pressure Iran into following the agreement; and he concluded that Russia’s military efforts in Syria are designed to fail, and that Russia should work with the United States. Federal heart research database Clinical heart trials have wasted a lot of money: the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute spent $2 billion on 200 trials over a decade where only two out of five studies were published. The heart institute will now publish all trials in a federal database , even if they never make it to a journal. Sleep study could change popular conceptions Everyone knows people are supposed to get eight hours of sleep per night , but a new study in Current Biology shows that hunter-gatherer populations without industry (TV, caffeine, city lights, the Internet) only sleep about 6.5 hours a night. They have a similar sleep efficiency — 81 to 86 percent — to modern populations. IN OTHER NEWS 100 worst places to live in PA The same website that ranked states by the Ashley Madison hack has ranked the worst places to live . They assessed the economies, school systems, employment, crime and other metrics to make the list. In Pennsylvania, the worst places to live are Newcastle, Nanticoke and Johnstown. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI