Posted in Education Did you recently graduate from a Pittsburgh college? Talk to us. PublicSource wants to know about recent grads’ career paths and degree satisfaction. by Emma Folts May 14, 2024 May 16, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Read more education stories What is your school’s AI policy? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? MORE STORIES Thousands of students graduate from Pittsburgh’s colleges and universities around this time each year. Are you a recent graduate of a local school? PublicSource wants to hear from you. The pandemic disrupted many students’ educational goals, career plans and personal lives. On top of that, landing the right job after graduation can be difficult. One study found that more than half of recent graduates of four-year institutions are “underemployed” a year later. With all of this in mind, we’re looking to chat with alumni who graduated between 2019 and 2024 to learn about their post-graduation career paths and satisfaction with their degrees. We’re hoping to collect a wide range of perspectives. If you’re happily climbing the career ladder, working in a field unrelated to your major or feel uncertain about your next steps after graduation, we’d love to hear from you. If you’d like to be interviewed, please fill out the form below. Emma Folts, our higher education reporter, may reach out to you for a follow-up interview. Then, we may publish your account alongside others. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Pennsylvania With no end to budget impasse in sight, Pa. school districts and counties warn of program cuts Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: careers , CMU , college , graduation , higher education , Pitt , Pittsburgh Emma Folts emma@publicsource.org Emma is a higher education reporter for PublicSource. In her role, she collaborates with Open Campus, a nonprofit newsroom focused on bolstering higher education coverage in local communities. Emma is... More by Emma Folts