Posted in Daily report , posts May 22, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 22, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Uncompensated care at hospitals Fewer Pittsburgh hospitals lost money last year, but the amount of uncollected and charity care rose 2.2 percent to about $1.1 billion . Pittsburgh: Allegheny Center mall to get technological makeover New York developer Faros Properties revealed plans to convert the mall on the North Side into a technology center called Nova Place. Harrisburg: Department of Human Services praises hospital closure The Harrisburg State Hospital was one of several closed in the last decade. A public health forum held Thursday debated the success of closing the central region’s only state-owned psychiatric ward. Harrisburg: Prohibition finally ends in Upper Allen Township National prohibition ended in 1934, but the small, conservative municipality has stayed dry despite several referendums. At the polls on Tuesday, Cumberland County voters opted to make the change. Philadelphia: Homeless shelters redefine menus New comprehensive food standards in Philadelphia call for increased fruits, vegetables, whole grains and lean meats, and with the help of nonprofit groups , some shelters are making wholesome food with fresh ingredients. Statewide: Slot machines at the airports State Rep. Nick Kotik plans to introduce a bill that will introduce slot machines to secured areas in Pennsylvania’s six international airports. NATIONAL Trans-Pacific Partnership advances in Senate To usher President Obama’s trade legislation into the next stages, Republican Mitch McConnell started making deals to persuade Senate Democrats to keep the bill afloat. Pentagon says it’s nobody’s fault $34 million was wasted The 64k facility was constructed in Afghanistan with all the available amenities, but never used. Two internal investigations by the Pentagon contend that no one will be held accountable. For more information, see our post on it. Plains All American Pipeline sees three times as many incidents as national average The company that’s spilled up to 105,000 gallons of crude in Pacific waters has been cited with 175 safety and maintenance infractions since 2006. Boy Scouts of America president calls for ban on discrimination In 2013, leaders voted that no boy should be excluded from the organization based on sexual orientation, but gay adult leaders are still exempt . The issue was brought up at the annual national meeting of Boy Scouts on Thursday, and is expected to be addressed formally in the future. IN OTHER NEWS Nintendo of America hires Bowser This is Doug Bowser , not the villain of the “Super Mario Bros.” video games. As the new vice president of sales, Doug Bowser “brings decades of experience, not fire breath, to new role.” The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.