Posted in Inside our Newsroom Here’s why our election coverage matters These are decisions that matter, so we’re stepping up our coverage. by Alyia Paulding September 6, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Elections touch every part of our lives, so over the next few months, PublicSource will explore the upcoming election from many different angles. We’ll delve into how communities are navigating this political season and the integrity of the information we’re receiving. We’ll ask: How could the results of the election impact everyday issues of your pocketbook and your health? And, you’ll learn more about the candidates running for office and discover what issues are motivating voters from all backgrounds in the Pittsburgh region. With every election-related story we publish over the next six weeks, we’ll tell you why the story matters, and why our work now and all the way through Election Day and beyond is worth supporting. (Make sure you’re signed up for our newsletters to get these special bulletins.) We’ve already been hard at work on election coverage for months. This post from reporter Charlie Wolfson talks about our overall approach and shares key stories , including an attempt to purge thousands of people from the Allegheny County voter rolls and debunking misinformation about mail voter fraud. You can visit our Democracy & Doubt page to catch up on everything else we’ve published to date, including: Political researchers discuss how relentless polarization led to the Trump assassination attempt, and what a path forward might look like. Kaylee Werner was already one of the youngest Biden delegates in the country. Then the president dropped out. With Donald Trump formally nominated as the Republican presidential candidate, debunked narratives of his loss to Joe Biden also reverberate among party faithful and local delegates. We’ll be in your inbox , letting you know when new in-depth and fact-checked stories come out in the coming weeks. We hope you’ll find them useful, and that you’ll consider supporting our newsroom so that we can continue publishing journalism that informs and investigates year-round. Give now Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , election , election 2024 , election denial , leadstorynoshow , misinformation , Pennsylvania , Pittsburgh Alyia Paulding alyia@publicsource.org Alyia (they/she) is the Director of Membership and Development at PublicSource, working to establish and nurture relationships with donors and funders. Before joining PublicSource in 2020, Alyia worked... More by Alyia Paulding