Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts PennFuture threatens to sue U.S. Steel over violations at Clairton Coke Works by Natasha Khan January 28, 2016 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A top Pennsylvania environmental advocacy group is threatening to sue U.S. Steel over what the group said are repeated violations of the U.S. Clean Air Act at the company’s Clairton Coke Works—North America’s largest coke producer. PennFuture filed a 60-day letter of intent to sue the company under the federal Clean Air Act. The group also sent the letter to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and the Allegheny County Health Department. The group said regulators have failed to enforce environmental laws. “The simple fact is that Clairton Coke Works is operating illegally, and public health is suffering because of it,” George Jugovic, Jr., PennFuture’s chief counsel, said in a statement. PennFuture said it discovered more than 6,700 air pollution violations between January 1, 2012 and May 31, 2015. That’s an average of “polluting over five times a day, every day for nearly three and a half years,” Jugovic said. A spokesperson for U.S. Steel declined to comment for this story. “In 2014, 93-tons of particulate matter was unnessarily released into the air,” Jugovic said. “Particulate matter has been shown to directly lead to lung irritation, asthma, bronchitis, cancer and cardiovascular disease.” John Graham, an atmospheric scientist at the Clean Air Task Force, drew links between the industrial sources of air pollution in the county and increased cancer risks. “Using data from the EPA’s National Air Toxics Assessment, Allegheny County ranks as one of the worst counties in the nation for cancer risk,” Graham said in a statement. “The assessment indicates toxic emissions from industrial point sources as a primary factor that contributes to the County’s poor performance.” Located 20 miles south of Pittsburgh, U.S. Steel’s Clairton Coke Works operates 10 coke batteries—the oldest ones have been in use since 1955. The press conference was held at an air pollution photography exhibit in gallery space at Pittsburgh Filmmakers. (PublicSource was once part of Pittsburgh Filmmakers and currently has office space there). A looming black and white photo of the Clairton Coke Works hung on a wall behind the speakers as they announced their plans to sue. “This exhibit, ‘In the Air: Visualizing What We Breathe,’ provides a visual reminder of the effects air pollutants has on public health,” Jugovic said. Cheryl Hurt, 68, who lives close to the coke works, provided a statement that was read aloud at the press conference by Annie Reagan, of PennFuture. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “In the Clairton community we don’t see black soot that used to be on our bedsheets and windows,” Hurt wrote. “Unfortunately people don’t realize it’s the fine particulate matter that is still in the air that is just as dangerous.” Reach PublicSource intern Sabrina Bodon at sbodon@pointpark.edu. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan