Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY A PA court strikes down law that bolstered NRA gun challenges by Natasha Khan June 25, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X In a big victory for Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto and other state and local politicians, a state court Thursday threw out a law that aided the National Rifle Association in challenging local gun ordinances in court. The Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania, an appellate court, ruled that the Republican-controlled legislature used an unconstitutional procedure to get the law enacted in the final days of last year’s session. Here’s the court’s decision explained by the AP: The gun provision was merged with a bill whose intent was to establish criminal penalties for theft of secondary metals, such as wires or cables. The judges said that process violated constitutional requirements that bills may not be altered to change their original purpose and must be confined to one subject. The ousted law, Act 192, would have allowed gun owners to challenge an ordinance without having to show they were harmed by it, and let the membership organizations such as the NRA sue on behalf of a member and recover damages if the challenge went in their favor. Peduto said in a statement that he was “overjoyed” that the state court system sided with citizens and public safety “instead of special rights for the gun lobby.” “This law was clearly unconstitutional from the outset, and designed to threaten Pittsburgh and other cities trying to protect their neighborhoods from illegal guns,” Peduto said. The ruling sends “a very strong message to the General Assembly that the old way of doing business just isn’t acceptable anymore,” Mark McDonald, press secretary to Philadelphia Mayor Michael Nutter, told the AP. “The law requires and the public expects transparency, deliberation and public debate.” Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Criminal Justice Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan