Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts PublicSource reporter receives national award by swalsh April 24, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Halle Stockton of PublicSource has received The Society of Professional Journalists’ national prize for feature reporting for ‘Love and Disability.’ The group recognizes ‘exceptional professional journalism’ produced in 2014 in print, radio, television and online categories. Stockton covers the elderly, people with disabilities, and healthcare topics. Her sensitive writing brought to life Bob and Tina Norris, a married couple with cerebral palsy, and the joys and struggles of their daily lives. Read the story here. Last year, Stockton described her affinity for the stories she covers in this video . “This recognition only affirms my commitment to journalism and particularly to writing about social issues,” Stockton said of the award. “I’m proud that I work for an organization and in a profession that gives people like Bob and Tina Norris a megaphone.” Stockton will receive the Sigma Delta Chi award in Washington, D.C., on June 26. Founded in 1909 as Sigma Delta Chi, SPJ promotes the free flow of information vital to a well-informed citizenry; works to inspire and educate the next generation of journalists; and protects First Amendment guarantees of freedom of speech and press. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.