Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts Capturing the real life of students by swalsh September 29, 2011 November 16, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource is at work on a number of enterprising projects to keep you informed about what’s going on in Pittsburgh and the Western Pennsylvania region. One of them is an audio slideshow by Pulitzer Prize winning photographer Martha Rial entitled “Single-Sex Classrooms: The Westinghouse Experiment.” Rial spent many hours in two ninth-grade classrooms at the Academies at Westinghouse, an experiment in single-sex education that started this fall in Pittsburgh’s Homewood neighborhood. The Academies are teaching boys and girls in separate schools with more hours in the school day and more days in the academic year. “Despite the new-school confusion and hallway scuffles, I met several students who were able to focus in the classroom and were committed to learning,” Rial said of her experience at the Academies. Rial is a Pittsburgh-based freelance photographer who previously worked as a staff photographer for The St. Petersburg Times, and her hometown newspaper, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. She tells the story of the young men and women at the Academies through thoughtfully composed and empathetic  portraits of the students, their mentors and teachers. Later in the school year, freelance writer Emily DeMarco will return to the Academies to talk with teachers, mentors and students about how the experiment has changed the dynamic in the school and how the learning experience is different. “On the afternoon of my second visit to the Academy, the historic building was teeming with emotion and energy,” DeMarco said. “As for the hotly debated single gender classes, the vote will most likely remain out for quite some time. “But, as some faculty and support staff told me, each day is better than the last.” FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.