Posted in Economy & Housing Tiny house village proposal for homelessness headed for hearing While some Pittsburgh planning officials panned a plan to allow temporary communities along riverfronts and Downtown, others would like to add the option to the city’s toolkit for addressing homelessness. by Rich Lord February 6, 2024 February 21, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X City Councilor Anthony Coghill looks at his drawing of his vision of a semipermanent community for people experiencing homelessness in Nov. 2023, at the City County Building in downtown Pittsburgh. Coghill and his colleague, Deb Gross, have been pushing for the idea of semipermanent community as one solution to the city’s homelessness needs. (Photo by Charlie Wolfson/PublicSource) Credit: Photo by Charlie Wolfson/PublicSource A proposal for tiny house villages for people facing homelessness drew fire from a Pittsburgh Department of City Planning official, but won a mixed response from planning commissioners ahead of a public hearing in two weeks. Pittsburgh Councilor Deb Gross briefed the City Planning Commission on legislation she sponsored, alongside Councilor Anthony Coghill, to allow “temporary managed communities” in the Golden Triangle and along some riverfronts. “Over 100 cities around the nation have created these tiny house villages for people who are housing insecure, already,” Gross told the commission. As a result, she said, thousands of people are sheltered, rather than living outdoors. Locally, though, “We’ve seen far too many tragedies already, just this year, just in the last few months, of deaths in the unhoused population.” A person rakes beside their tent as traffic passes the First Avenue encampment where they were staying, on Sunday, Oct. 29, 2023, in downtown Pittsburgh. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) City Zoning Administrator Corey Layman, though, said the legislation, modeled on Denver’s zoning code, was “out of context” with Pittsburgh’s ordinances. He added that it could have the unintended effect of making existing Pittsburgh encampments, which don’t meet its specifications, “nonconforming and illegal,” potentially forcing the city to remove them. “The city may assume liability for activities within the [temporary] camps,” he added. Economy & Housing City panel to council: Take more time on tiny houses proposal for riverfronts During the first in-person Pittsburgh City Planning Commission meeting since 2020, the panel heard members of the public voice support and skepticism about a temporary housing plan. The proposed ordinance would: Allow nonprofit entities or government-related organizations to seek permits to build and manage temporary communities Require a community meeting before any decision on a permit If a permit is granted, allow the agency to build temporary structures for no more than 50 people who are experiencing homelessness or are at risk of becoming homeless Require restroom and bathing facilities Prohibit storage of “junk” Allow fences of up to 6’ in height, plus gardening (but no agricultural animals) and dumpsters. Gross said she and Coghill drafted the legislation out of frustration with the city code’s current rules and processes for permitting housing for people facing homelessness: “It’s just not fast enough. It’s slow, it’s expensive,” she said. Layman said the city’s planning and law departments are working on changes to the zoning code, meant to improve the process, which they plan to bring to the commission “in the next couple of months.” The commission is expected to take public testimony on the temporary managed communities proposal on Feb. 20, and vote on whether to recommend adoption. The legislation will then go back to Pittsburgh City Council for a vote, and if approved would go to Mayor Ed Gainey for signature or veto. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Commissioner Rachel O’Neill said she “can’t support this legislation because I think it acts in direct conflict with its stated goals” by effectively rendering existing encampments unlawful. Investigations Smithfield homeless shelter in downtown Pittsburgh exposed frayed safety net and tested county compassion An emergency fallback as cold weather loomed, the Smithfield shelter became a lightning rod, a community and a telling moment in the region’s effort to address the housing crisis. Commissioner Mel Ngami wondered whether tiny house villages elsewhere were “standing the test of time.” If not? “You’re just essentially creating a slum, but in a built environment, in a lot of ways, in which you’re just, kind of, packaging them in a space,” Ngami said. A tent catches the sun and shadows of a summer afternoon on Friday, Aug. 11, 2023, in Pittsburgh. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Other commissioners, though, were more amenable. Commissioner Peter Quintanilla said he’s seen tiny houses “done quite beautifully and it can be really great.” There may be issues to resolve, he said. “But in general, let’s just figure out how we can make it happen.” “I want to see this pursued, absolutely, as diligently as possible” via compromise between the planning department and council members, said Commissioner Holly Dick. Rich Lord is PublicSource’s managing editor and can be reached at rich@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , Homelessness , leadstorynoshow , Pittsburgh , Vulnerable populations Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord