Posted in Daily report , posts July 28, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 28, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Gasoline prices dipping According to gas tracking website GasBuddy, gas prices fell more than 4 cents per gallon last week, averaging about $2.87 per gallon. That’s about 88 cents per gallon less than a year ago and about 11 cents less than a month ago. Pittsburgh: City incline to close for $3.5 million reconstruction Starting Aug. 31, the Monongahela Incline will close for a reconstruction project that will take about 12 weeks. The project was originally scheduled for June, but was pushed back to address resident concerns. Lancaster: State officials promise to “reboot” efforts to clean up Chesapeake Bay Pennsylvania’s environmental and agriculture secretaries promised to refocus efforts on the water cleanup. The water flows from the Bay into the Susquehanna River. Last month, authorities said they were “ substantially off track .” Latrobe: Steelers president entertains idea of Pittsburgh hosting Super Bowl 57 Steelers President Art Rooney II is planning to submit an application for Pittsburgh to host Super Bowl 57 in 2023. For that to happen, Rooney said , Heinz Field would need to install more seats. This reconstruction could also mean exchanging the field’s grass playing surface for turf. Kempton: Hiking trail becomes accessible for people with disabilities Timed appropriately with the 25th anniversary of the Americans with Disabilities Act, the new $600,000 trail to the park’s bird-watching sanctuary opened on Sunday. Eastern Pennsylvania: Attempt to pass bill that would prohibit discrimination State Rep. Sue Helm, R-Dauphin, is sponsoring a bill that would prohibit rental discrimination against students and end limits on the number of unrelated people allowed to live in a house or apartment. Many people in college towns are against the measure because they think it will infringe on the peace and safety in their communities. NATIONAL Senate resurrects Export-Import Bank On Sunday, the Senate voted to attach the bank’s revival to a highway funding bill, which is expected to pass the Senate early this week. The bipartisan vote, 67 to 26, also broke a filibuster . U.S. bid for 2024 Summer Olympics in limbo Boston Mayor Marty Walsh said Monday he would not be rushed into supporting the city’s bid for the Olympic games without more information. Without Boston’s commitment, the U.S. Olympics Committee may push for Los Angeles as a host. Medical examination on death of Bobbi Kristina Brown A coroner in Atlanta will conduct an autopsy on the only child of pop stars Whitney Houston and Bobby Brown. She was found unconscious in a bathtub on Jan. 31, and died on Sunday after being kept in a medically induced coma. IN OTHER NEWS A lesson in chocolate Today marks the observance of National Milk Chocolate Day . Pennsylvania has its own history with chocolate in Hershey, but the chocolate-making process goes back to Hernando Cortez’s conquest of Mexico, as far back as 1657. In 1847, the first “candy bar” was invented, and it wasn’t until 1876 that the first milk chocolate was invented. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.