Posted in Daily report , posts May 30, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 30, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Stroudsburg: Man pleads guilty to killing three at municipal meeting In 2013, Rockne Newell was forced off of his condemned property and took revenge by firing on a municipal meeting . Three people were killed. At his hearing Friday, he pleaded guilty and  was given three life sentences and then some. Pittsburgh: Roman Catholic Diocese of Pittsburgh to petition Supreme Court On Friday, a law firm representing the diocese filed a case with the U.S. Supreme Court to oppose the Affordable Care Act’s mandate for the church to offer coverage for contraceptives . Philadelphia: Legislation may require political action committees to disclose donors Unions and wealthy donors aren’t allowed to affiliate with the people they support, but they’re also not forced to reveal themselves until 11 days before a primary. A bill introduced Thursday would require that disclosure six weeks in advance of a primary or election. Harrisburg: Commonwealth Court says UPMC must see Highmark Medicare patients UPMC announced on Friday that it will appeal an early court decision, ordering the health system to to maintain in-network arrangements with 182,000 Medicare Advantage patients insured by Highmark Inc. If the companies are unable to negotiate by July 1, they will be forced to select an arbitrator to settle any remaining issues. Statewide: Securing loved ones’ last letters Some families in Pennsylvania are calling for a state rule on the release of suicide notes . Right now, it differs by county. Some coroners’ offices refuse to release the originals because they’re considered evidence; some keep the notes for a year; and others release them as soon as the cause of death is confirmed. NATIONAL Indictment of former U.S. House Speaker Dennis Hastert was indicted by a federal grand jury Thursday for paying $3.5 million in hush money, corresponding to allegations of sexual abuse against a student from the town in which Hastert taught high school for 16 years. U.S.-Cuba relations President Obama continues to improve relations with Cuba by officially removing the nation from the state-sponsored terrorism list on Friday. California drought could spell ecological disaster Salton Sea is the largest lake in California, but it’s rapid dissipation could endanger wildlife and thousands of people. Residents of the valley wish to preserve the lake, but are unable to reach a consensus with the California State Water Board on what actions to take. IN OTHER NEWS Roger Waters and Nick Mason reunite for Pink Floyd’s 50th anniversary Pink Floyd’s surviving members met on Thursday to unveil an honorary plaque at London’s University of Westminster, the site of the band’s inception. They joked that back then, the band probably wouldn’t have made it past the audition stage of “Britain’s Got Talent.” The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.