Posted in Daily report , posts June 4, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 4, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Tobyhanna: Three dead, 13 hospitalized in bus crash A tractor-trailer and a tour bus collided on I-380 in the Poconos region on Wednesday morning. The Monroe County coroner revealed three had been killed, as of yesterday evening, and more than a dozen others were taken to the hospital. Harrisburg: Legislative group aims to reform districts Congressional district boundaries change , and in some cases, people inherit senators they didn’t choose. In order for lawmakers to reform by the 2020 census, they have to amend the state’s constitution and obtain voter approval via referendum. Pittsburgh: UPMC placed on transplant probation UPMC repeatedly accepted organs for patients who later became unable to receive the transplant, and then transplanted the organ into another one of UPMC’s patients without consulting the nationwide hierarchy of need. Pittsburgh: Chatham University president announces retirement Esther Barazzone , who’s presided at the university since 1991, submitted her retirement Friday. Officials announced her decision Wednesday. She’ll remain in the position until summer 2016. Fayette County: Councilman’s son, Thomas Aaron Bush, found drowned Over the weekend, the councilman’s son went fishing with a friend on the Monongahela River. His body was found Tuesday morning, and the autopsy revealed he had drowned. Allentown: Beltzville Lake Beach closed, again The Carbon County beach is closed because a water sample taken June 1 exposed a high bacteria count in the water. Last summer, the beach was closed four times for the same reason. NATIONAL U.S. airstrikes have killed 10,000 Islamic State members In nine months, American-led airstrikes in Iraq and Syria have killed up to one-third of the Islamic State’s forces. More anthrax than initially thought At first, it was just nine states and a base in South Korea. The number now sits at 51 laboratories in 17 states, the District of Columbia and three foreign countries, with even those numbers expected to rise. Off-road driving on beaches Nesting shorebirds and their young are exposed to great risks when people take their vehicles on beaches. Eggs can be crushed or the parents can be frightened off by the loud sounds. Whether vehicles are allowed on beaches varies from city to city. IN OTHER NEWS Clint Eastwood’s next film is another biopic Eastwood will be adapting the memoir of Chesley “Sully” Sullenberger , the pilot responsible for the “Miracle on the Hudson” — the one who landed a U.S. Airways plane in the Hudson River in 2009. PA’s top baby names In 2014, the biggest names were Mason and Emma . A couple of new ones made the registry though, including Layken, Chyna, Avian and Zephaniah. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.