Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource is beyond grateful for our reader support in 2020 by Public Source January 24, 2021 January 27, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X As we kick off 2021 and glean lessons on what 2020 has meant for PublicSource, we are pleased to report that thanks to our readers and supporters, our end-of-year fundraising efforts were hugely successful. Through the gifts of our generous members, the support of the NewsMatch campaign, a generous contribution from the Wyncote Foundation, and the kindness of the supporters who helped establish our local match pool, we will receive over $70,000 to continue our work in 2021. We finished 2020 with over 1,000 members, which includes people who chose to support our work at any amount in the last calendar year, and we are beyond grateful for it. We know that times are hard for many people, and every contribution we receive matters to us. Your support allowed us to publish over 390 stories and launch our first podcast. You used our stories to create significant community impact, including new legislation, programs and accountability for elected officials. In 2020, more than 133,000 of you read PublicSource each month, bringing over 2.4 million pageviews to publicsource.org. It’s our goal to be an essential news provider for the Pittsburgh region, and we are honored to know that so many of you value local independent journalism and include PublicSource in your media diet. Please accept our many thanks for your support and our promise that we will continue to deliver the uncompromising, rigorous, in-depth journalism you deserve. There are always more local stories that need to be told, and we continue to seek out ways to meet more of the region’s information needs. For instance, we’re currently seeking a journalist to cover race relations in our area through Report for America, and PublicSource will need to raise half of the funds to support this essential work. If you weren’t able to contribute to the end of year fundraising drive but wish to show your support now, please consider making a one-time or monthly donation at whatever level is comfortable for you. If you are looking to support PublicSource in non-financial ways, please consider sharing our work with friends and family, whether on social media or in other ways. We know that word of mouth is the primary way that Pittsburghers learn about our reporting. Readers like you make that happen. Again, on behalf of our entire team, thank you for reading, for sharing, for giving, and most of all, for caring about the Pittsburgh region, the place we call home. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI