Posted in EXECUTIVE DECISION Polls close, counting continues in contentious Allegheny County elections Sara Innamorato and Joe Rockey finished their race for Allegheny County executive today as voters were finalizing their decisions on that contest and the DA race. An unusually expensive and competitive local election cycle concludes. by Charlie Wolfson November 7, 2023 November 8, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Emma Shoucair, left, attorney for the Allegheny County Democratic Committee, looks at the first poll numbers in for the night with state Rep. Malcolm Kenyatta at the election night party for Sara Innamorato, Democratic nominee for Allegheny County Executive, at Mr. Smalls in Millvale. “It was mostly quiet,” Shoucair said. There were a couple of fist fights, but mostly over school board races.” (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Polls are closed in Allegheny County following contests for county executive and district attorney. The office of County Executive Rich Fitzgerald — who is limited by the Home Rule Charter to three terms — reported a handful of early polling place problems which were quickly remedied within hours of the 7 a.m. start of voting. Headlining the municipal General Election ballot was the expensive , competitive race between Democrat Sara Innamorato and Republican Joe Rockey to replace the Democrat Fitzgerald. Read more: Innamorato wins executive race, offers Allegheny County government ‘connected to the struggle of everyday people’ Stephen Zappala, incumbent district attorney and Republican nominee during his Nov. 7 election night watch party at Cup’s Cafe II in Pittsburgh’s South. (Photos via by James Paul/Center for Media Innovation at Point Park University) Troy Fisher, a 24-year-old consultant, voted at a polling place Downtown. He said that the name recognition of candidates played a role in his decision-making but added that Joe Rockey, the Republican candidate for county executive, seemed to be more aligned with his beliefs. Fisher, who cited economic stability and improved local commerce as issues he cares about, said that Rockey seemed to be a more moderate candidate. “Voting is very important to us, both to protect ourselves and our friends,” said Anne Troxel, 29, of Crafton Heights, a member of Pittsburgh’s LGBTQ+ community, adding that she voted for Innamorato. Read more: Stephen Zappala wins DA race, pledges action on Downtown, South Side A freelance photographer, she said her strong belief in marriage equality, abortion rights and rights for trans people motivated her to vote, but those issues “are all very interwoven.” “And it’s not just abortion, it’s really about your right to your body and your right to make choices about it beyond just any singular issue,” Troxel said. “So, you know, I’d say it’s just a really important time to be voting.” Allegheny County residents Kammy Hoover, 51, and Michele Jennings, 49, at Republican County Executive nominee Joe Rockey’s election party at the Wyndham Grand Hotel Downtown Pittsburgh on Nov. 7, 2023. (Photo by Ben Brady/PublicSource) Berthony, a 59-year-old professor at the University of Pittsburgh who asked that his last name not be used, said he voted for the future generation. He said elections are crucial, but the public lacks information about them. He added that his voting was driven by excluding candidates who interfere with individual liberty. Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Pennsylvania With no end to budget impasse in sight, Pa. school districts and counties warn of program cuts Gagging Academia Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Earlier in the day, both candidates for executive professed confidence in the campaigns they’d run. More stories on Election Day 2023 Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. What is your school’s AI policy? “I think [the competitive race] sends a message to the far right and the far left that offering centrist candidates is the future, and it’s what Allegheny County truly wants,” Rockey said after casting his ballot in Ohio Township Tuesday afternoon. Read more: Young voters cast ballots with abortion access, student loans and book bans on their minds Said Innamorato: “I think that [voters] value experience, that they value pragmatism, but they also value someone who is willing to stand up for issues and a vision that can move everyone forward.” She voted in Lawrenceville shortly after the 7 a.m. opening of the polls. Voters also weighed in on the future of criminal justice policy in the county with the district attorney’s race, in which incumbent Stephen Zappala — a longtime Democrat who ended up as the Republican nominee due to write-in votes — faced the toughest electoral challenge of his career in progressive Democrat Matt Dugan. Dugan bested Zappala in the Democratic primary in May. “I want Zappala out because I just feel we haven’t been treated fair,” said Charla Wilson, 44, a nursing assistant from Sheraden who described how the criminal justice system unfairly punishes Black men like her brother, outside the Ascension Catholic Church in Windgap. She said he spent 22 years in federal prison for possession of 14 grams of crack cocaine due to Pennsylvania’s three-strikes law , which imposes harsher sentences on those who’ve been convicted of multiple offenses. Read more: New board members lay out their visions as PPS prepares for closures and budget cuts “And there’s nothing that’s helping rehabilitate our Black men, like everyone deserves a second chance at life,” she said, adding that Zappala’s been in office since 1998, when President Bill Clinton was in his second term. For his part,  Zappala said he’s counting on his pull among the wider electorate. “Unlike the primary, I think you’re going to hear from the entire public,” Zappala said at the polls. “This time we didn’t get snuck up on. We weren’t outspent 4-1. We stayed with them the whole way, and I think this time you’re going to see a different result.” Dugan said his campaign “worked as hard as we could work. When we got into this race, we were going to control as much as we could control. … I really feel like we left it all on the field. Read more: Pitt presses charges against protesters calling for greater LGBTQ support “We have an opportunity to do something very very bold here today, to build a criminal justice system that can move the system toward more just outcomes and safer communities,” he continued. Zappala said he’s “enjoyed every minute” of his quarter-century tenure in the office. “It’s long hours, but I wouldn’t trade it for anything in the world. It’s an honor.” At the state level , voters chose a new justice of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, a race that could impact the future of reproductive rights in the commonwealth, among other things. Jeh and LaMetrice Dopson went to a Downtown polling place Tuesday evening. The two believe it’s important to vote and make their voices heard — “How can we complain,” if they don’t exercise that right, said Jeh, 62, who is semi-retired. The state Supreme Court race was of particular importance to Jeh, as he and LaMetrice said they care about abortion rights. Read more: Police reform, nonprofit payments on Gainey’s list as mid-term approaches Many of the county’s 130 municipalities elected mayors, council members and commissioners, and numerous school board races that were unusually contentious and expensive reached their conclusions. Amir Jackson, 20, voted for the first time at Dilworth Elementary School in East Liberty. He said he voted to create change. He said voted for Democrats and the local election had a direct impact on the community. “Not many Gen-Z are showing up. It matters for this election,” he said. Catherine Jordan, 39, of East Liberty, said she voted for Sara Innamorato and Carl Redwood, who she believes will be good leaders. She said her voting choices were informed by prioritizing abortion rights and the hope for women’s health to be open and available to all. She added she voted for Innamorato because she “will make the right choices.” Read more: Where have all my neighbors gone? How short-term rentals are shrinking my community. Fred Como, a 58-year-old health and wellness coach, said he voted for Republicans to make sure his rights are protected. “I don’t want the influence of socialists or communists in this country or this city. I see too much of that in the left-leaning candidates,” he said. Elections pick up and drop off location and ballot collection occurred leading up to elections across Pennsylvania, on Monday, Nov. 6, 2023, in Downtown. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) The races This year is thought to be the Republicans’ best shot in many years to win the Allegheny County executive’s office, with an open seat, a well-funded candidate and a Democratic opponent the GOP views as beatable. Innamorato is among the progressive wing of the local party, which has notched big wins in recent years. Left: Sara Innamorato at a campaign press conference Downtown. Right: Joe Rockey at a campaign event at a South Side V.F.W. hall. (Photos by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) The Democrats have a 2-to-1 voter registration edge in the county, forming a steep hill for Rockey to climb. But he raised more than $1.6 million from June through October and has blanketed televisions from McCandless to Clairton with ads that play up his business background and never mention the word ‘Republican.’ Read more: Half baked? Pact for East End development has mayor hungry for more affordable housing Voters will also deliver a verdict on Allegheny County District Attorney Stephen Zappala, who is running to extend his tenure of more than 25 years in that office. He faces off against the Democratic nominee, Matt Dugan, who defeated him in the Democratic primary. Zappala has since accepted the Republican nomination for the job. Stephen A. Zappala Jr., the District Attorney of Allegheny County, talks to the media outside his polling location at the Cooper-Siegel Community Library on Election Day, Tuesday, Nov. 7, 2023, in Fox Chapel. The longtime incumbent DA is being challenged by attorney Matt Dugan. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) On Allegheny County Council, incumbent Democrat DeWitt Walton ( District 10 ) and Democratic nominee David Bonaroti ( District 13 ) are facing spirited challenges from independent candidates Carl Redwood and Sam Schmidt, respectively. Both Redwood and Schmidt identify as socialists. Read more: The Pittsburgh Promise helped thousands of students pay for college. As costs rise, the funding is going away. Elsewhere, Democrats Dan Grzybek (District 5), John Palmiere (District 6) and Paul Klein (District 11) are running to defend the Democrats’ 13-2 majority in the county’s legislative branch. Of the two Republican members, one is running in a competitive race for re-election: Suzanne Filiaggi in District 2. Republican Sam DeMarco and Democrat Bethany Hallam are running unopposed for at-large seats. Carl Redwood interacts with Todd Elliott Koger outside of a polling station at St. Stephen’s Episcopal Church on Nov. 7, 2023. (Mars Johnson/ City Paper) In the City of Pittsburgh, five of six races are uncontested. Democratic controller candidate Rachael Heisler and City Council nominees Bobby Wilson, Bob Charland, Barb Warwick and Khari Mosley will cruise to victory. Councilor Deb Gross faces a challenge from an independent candidate, James Miller. Allegheny County Controller Corey O’Connor, center, the Democrat defending the office to which he was appointed last year, visits the polling location at the Fox Chapel Presbyterian Church on Election Day, Tuesday, Nov. 7, 2023, in Fox Chapel. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Learn more Read coverage from PublicSource and our partners to learn more before you head to the polls. County executive overview: A generational decision between Innamorato, Rockey Is Allegheny County going tribal? Centrist traditions to be tested Nov. 7. District attorney overview: Why Andrew Yang and George Soros are bringing national heat to the Allegheny County DA race Environment: Allegheny County executive election puts environmental decisions up in the air Property tax: Property taxes divide Allegheny County executive candidates, and Philadelphia’s experience looms large Campaign finance: In Allegheny County exec race, four top donors to Republican match Democrat’s entire haul Allegheny County election results Mail-in ballot results will be published by the county at 8 p.m. Election Day votes will be reported by precinct, gradually, starting around 9 p.m. Follow @PublicSourcePA on X (formerly Twitter) for updates from reporters, and check PublicSource.org for updates as soon as results are clear. Charlie Wolfson is PublicSource’s local government reporter and a Report for America corps member. He can be reached at charlie@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , Local politics , Pittsburgh Charlie Wolfson charlie@publicsource.org x Charlie Wolfson is an enterprise reporter for Pittsburgh's Public Source, focusing on local government accountability and politics in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. He was a Report for America corps... More by Charlie Wolfson