Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource brings renewed team to Pittsburgh journalism as it rounds the decade mark The nonprofit digital-first newsroom serving Allegheny County features new and established faces covering news and forging partnerships. by Rich Lord September 30, 2022 September 30, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The PublicSource newsroom is growing as the nonprofit newsroom marks a decade of progress . Here are the journalists gathering and presenting news and developing partnerships for your nonprofit newsroom. Lajja Mistry is the K-12 education reporter at PublicSource. Originally from India, she moved to the U.S. in 2021 to pursue a master’s degree in journalism from the University of Southern California. Her work has been published in the Los Angeles Times, The Caravan and Ampersand among others. She uses journalism as a means to follow her passion for storytelling through text and visually driven stories. Contact: lajja@publicsource.org Charlie Wolfson focuses on local government accountability in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County.  A Report for America corps member, he previously worked at the Boston Globe and covered election law and voting access as a freelance reporter for PublicSource. In 2020, Charlie graduated from Northeastern University with a degree in journalism and political science. Contact: charlie@publicsource.org Amelia Winger recently joined PublicSource as the health and mental health reporter. A 2022 graduate of Temple University, with a bachelor’s degree in journalism and political science, Amelia is fresh from an internship at Philadelphia NPR affiliate WHYY. While there, she participated in the creation of the city’s first gun violence prevention beat. Prior to that, she interned with PublicSource. Contact: amelia@publicsource.org Stephanie Strasburg is a photojournalist and documentary filmmaker at PublicSource. In her prior role at the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, she participated in the newsroom’s Pulitzer Prize-winning reporting on the Tree of Life massacre, and on a team that was a Pulitzer finalist for its investigation on sexual abuse in the Amish and Mennonite communities. She also covered the region’s overdose crisis and the effects of concentrated poverty on children. Stephanie serves as the education liaison for the Pittsburgh chapter of Video Consortium . Contact: stephanie@publicsource.org Eric Jankiewicz is a reporter focused on housing and economic development. A native New Yorker, Eric moved to Pittsburgh in 2017. Before joining PublicSource, he was a court reporter for the Butler Eagle, where he covered criminal and civil court, and he has also worked for the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, NBC News and other outlets. Eric graduated from CUNY Graduate School of Journalism. Contact: ericj@publicsource.org Jourdan Hicks is a senior community correspondent and host of the From the Source podcast. She is often seen at events and meetings introducing PublicSource’s journalism and its opportunities to participate to the community. Before joining PublicSource in 2017, Jourdan was a community-based educator in Hazelwood. Contact: jourdan@publicsource.org Quinn Glabicki covers climate change and the environment through reporting and photography as a Report for America corps member. A Haverford College graduate with a bachelor’s degree in political science, he has worked as a freelance journalist, including a recent award-winning photo essay for PublicSource. Contact: quinn@publicsource.org Emma Folts is PublicSource’s higher education reporter, a role supported by Open Campus , a nonprofit newsroom focused on bolstering higher education coverage. A recent graduate of Syracuse University with a bachelor’s degree in journalism, she was the managing editor of The Daily Orange student-run newspaper. Emma interned at PublicSource and the Los Angeles Business Journal. Contact: emma@publicsource.org Leading editorial efforts are TyLisa C. Johnson as audience engagement editor; Natasha Vicens as creative director; Rich Lord as managing editor; and Halle Stockton as editor-in-chief. Learn more about our team and how to contact each of us by visiting our staff page. PublicSource is a nonpartisan, nonprofit, digital-first media organization dedicated to serving Pittsburgh and the region. PublicSource inspires critical thinking and bold ideas through journalism rooted in facts, diverse voices and pursuit of transparency. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord