North Side FEATURED PPS graduate and Somali Bantu leader sees echoes of Schenley closure in latest school changes Fatuma Muhina saw high school disrupted by Schenley High’s closure. Now she weighs the district’s impending reconfiguration and its ramifications for her children and those of other refugee families. by Lajja Mistry August 28, 2025 September 2, 2025 LATEST NEWS Court-ordered mental health options — 302 and AOT — explained by Venuri Siriwardane and Rich Lord August 15, 2025 September 30, 2025 Housing advocates, hosts split on bill to regulate short-term rentals in Pittsburgh by Femi Horrall August 11, 2025 September 30, 2025 ADVERTISEMENT Follow local stories that matter to you. Sign up More stories Activists pitch tents outside Downtown shelter, saying repeated encampment closures thwart their outreach A homeless camp outside Second Avenue Commons is the latest of many prominent encampments to  have been cleared since Pittsburgh formalized its policy two years ago. Advocates and outreach workers say their disappearance masks the true problems as they attempt to support a growing unhoused population. by Stephanie Strasburg and Jamie Wiggan August 8, 2025 September 30, 2025 Pittsburgh’s police review board head says Gainey administration ‘has not been transparent’ Contemplating a probe into a rough June arrest, the Citizen Police Review Board says the administration has closed its windows into police camera footage. by Charlie Wolfson July 23, 2025 September 30, 2025 North Side map Things to do More North Side stories Young Pittsburghers share outlooks on violence prevention Violence prevention has been a hot topic in Pittsburgh in recent weeks. At an anti-violence symposium, four youth voices highlighted their personal experiences and thoughts on how to create a safer city. by Femi Horrall July 16, 2025 September 30, 2025 ‘The Pitt’ put Pittsburgh’s ER problems in the spotlight. AGH’s $43M renovation hopes to fix them. The hospital that inspired the medical drama has the longest wait times in the city, though long visits are common across the major health systems. AGH and UPMC both have major revamps underway that could ease wait times. by Ayla Saeed July 7, 2025 September 30, 2025 Forceful North Side arrest prompts police review The arrest, captured on video by observers including a PublicSource staff member, involved a man who has been characterized as paraplegic in court records and who now faces charges of fleeing and terroristic threats. by Charlie Wolfson June 11, 2025 September 30, 2025 Zombies to ‘Cabaret’: How Perry High’s arts scene is driving school spirit Perry High School was among the few PPS schools that showed a modest enrollment growth in 2024, despite various challenges. A year later, the school continues to push its boundaries to become a premier North Side school. by Lajja Mistry June 2, 2025 Are you from the North Side? Check out our zine! Pittsburgh’s Public Source produced a neighborhood zine — a limited-run, miniature magazine — about the North Side. Read about the process here . Check out a digital version of the zine ! Neighborhood Spotlight: Manchester Residents fear monthly bills as Pittsburgh Water seeks 33% rate hike Future of Manchester garden uncertain after city land sale halted Updated report spares Roosevelt, Schiller, Conroy from PPS closures To save public housing, Allegheny County agency wants tenants to move out, up Why we’re making neighborhood zines and what we hope they spark Our journalism usually lives online. This time, it’s on paper — and in your neighborhood. Here’s the story behind our first North Side zine. by Halle Stockton Tug of war over Pittsburgh property puts conservatorship system on trial When a developer sought conservatorship over a Mexican War Streets property, nonprofit Rising Tide Partners intervened. The case — plus a bevy of East Hills conservatorships — is a window into the use of the law allowing private parties to take over properties. by Eric Jankiewicz and Bella Markovitz Timeline: Astrobotic’s rise from CMU spinout to trusted NASA moon partner The North Side company is bringing the lunar economy to Pittsburgh. by Aakanksha Agarwal Update: Ahead of Esplanade, Manchester now has two groups with development standing Pittsburgh’s city planners gave the nod to Manchester Neighbors as a new registered community organization, months after awarding that designation to an alliance of community groups. by Eric Jankiewicz Timeline: How Pittsburgh officials decided who speaks for Manchester After a group called Manchester Neighbors asked to serve as the registered community organization for their neighborhood, another group — with an influential booster — moved to seize that role first. by Rich Lord One Manchester group ‘waiting for word’ after another got the city’s official nod The Esplanade development plan spurred two organizations to file with Pittsburgh’s Registered Community Organization Program, and a neighbors group that has seen its bid shelved now plans to “agitate, agitate, agitate.” by Eric Jankiewicz and Rich Lord Zoning feud hijacks Pittsburgh planning agenda as mayor and councilor spar over affordable housing A signature zoning reform agenda advanced by Pittsburgh Mayor Ed Gainey was postponed even as a city councilor advanced a competing proposal. The City Planning Commission must address both in the new year. by Eric Jankiewicz You survived 2024. Now vote one more time — for your must-follow news topics. While the election grabbed attention, Pittsburgh, Allegheny County and the Southwestern Pennsylvania region also saw big changes in government spending, housing, energy, the environment, education and health. by Jamie Wiggan and Rich Lord Winter shelter deep in North Side opens amid concerns The Allegheny County Department of Human Services is prepared to transport unhoused people from Downtown — where many previously sheltered during the winter — to a former school in Perry South. City human relations officials question the decision. by Eric Jankiewicz Bankrupt North Side Comfort Inn won’t become affordable housing The Pennsylvania hotelier beat out a competing bidder eyeing the site for an affordable housing project that prompted mixed feelings in the community. by Eric Jankiewicz Hotel-to-housing plan renews uncomfortable affordable housing debate in North Side The potential conversion of a Comfort Inn in East Allegheny to affordable housing has neighbors worried about concentration of lower-income households, and the developer urging people against “equating low-income housing and criminality.” by Eric Jankiewicz Manchester endorsements propel Esplanade approval The Pittsburgh City Planning Commission’s approval of the proposed $740 million housing, entertainment and retail complex allows Piatt Companies to focus on the design of each of seven buildings, which will go through similar hearings and votes. by Rich Lord As $740 million Esplanade approaches Tuesday hearing, Manchester residents unsure of their voice A Ferris-wheel-topped development would cast a long shadow on a historic, majority-Black neighborhood — one that so far lacks the kind of community organization that could bring resident concerns to Pittsburgh’s decision makers. by Tony Norman Load more posts Something went wrong. Please refresh the page and/or try again.