Posted in On the beat , posts $34 million wasted trying to convince Afghans to eat more soy products by Eric Holmberg July 25, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A program to introduce more protein into the Afghan diet by using soy products failed miserably and cost U.S. taxpayers tens of millions of dollars. An investigation by the Center for Public Integrity found that the program, overseen by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and implemented by the American Soybean Association, was doomed to fail. The program was part of a larger effort to rebuild Afghanistan following the pullout of most American troops. The country’s climate turns out to be inappropriate for soy cultivation and its farming culture is ill-prepared for large-scale soybean production. Soybeans are now no more a viable commercial crop in Afghanistan than they were in 2010, when the $34 million program got started, according to a government-funded evaluation of the effort this year. When the first Afghan soybean crop failed, they had to import 4,000 metric tons of soybeans from the U.S. at a cost of $2 million. The initial idea for the soybean program was based on a taste test with 20 Afghans, who all preferred a soy-based drink over a milk-based one. This tiny, unscientific survey formed the foundation of the U.S. government’s four-year effort to change the Afghan diet, according to multiple sources. Not only was the crop not able to grow on a large scale, the results of the beverage taste test did not translate to bread. Afghans did not like the taste of the soy-based bread, called “strong naan” on advertisements and storefronts. In March, Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction John Sopko met with project and government employees in the country who told him there is no ”significant demand for soybean products in Afghanistan,” as he wrote in a letter the following month to Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack. “This should have been expected, since Afghans apparently have never grown or eaten soybeans before,” Sopko wrote. Sopko went on to write that all of the problems with the program could have been anticipated and possibly avoided. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.