Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 29, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 29, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Student transfer plan moving forward The Wilkinsburg School Board approved a plan to send students to George Westinghouse Academy in Homewood.The board of Pittsburgh Public Schools was scheduled to vote on the matter Wednesday night. The neighborhood has cut back on courses, school activities and staff because more students are transferring to charter schools. Pittsburgh: Jobless rates released The jobless rate in Southwestern Pennsylvania rose to 5.3 percent in September, which surpasses the national average of 5.1 percent. The Pittsburgh area’s rate remained in the middle of the pack for metro areas statewide. Harrisburg: Easier access to heroin antidote Physician General Rachel Levine, alongside Gov. Tom Wolf and other department secretaries, signed an order allowing medical workers who are not doctors to distribute the heroin antidote naloxone . California and Massachusetts have already adopted this distribution model to combat the nation’s epidemic. Harrisburg: State budget talks continue Senate Majority Leader Jake Corman (R-Centre County) said he would request a vote to override Gov. Wolf’s veto of the short-term budget bill last month. The $11 billion deal would go to funding school districts and state agencies. Bethlehem: Crash with university bus leads to death A motorist is dead after a Lehigh University bus collided with a car on the highway. The bus was carrying members of the school’s men’s and women’s rowing teams, some of whom were sent to the hospital with minor injuries. NATIONAL Third time’s the charm CNBC hosted the third Republican presidential debate Wednesday night in Boulder, Colo. Since the last debate, retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson has surged in the polls and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker has dropped out. Developments in the House Legislators were moving forward on a budget that would allot $80 billion to the Pentagon and domestic agencies as well as let the government borrow to pay bills until 2017. The House is scheduled to vote to elect Paul Ryan (R-OH) as speaker on Thursday. Ex-speaker sentenced Former Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert pleaded guilty to failing to report money he allegedly used as hush money to cover up a sex scandal from his days as a teacher at Yorkville High School. He will be sentenced Feb. 29 to a term that could last up to six months. Student scores sink Students scored lower on a national math exam for the first time since the test began in 1990. Education officials say changing school policies, increased student diversity and inadequate funding may have contributed to the decline. IN OTHER NEWS Still man’s best friend? At least six Americans have been shot by dogs over the past five years, according to news reports. The canines have triggered shots by stepping on guns or jumping on their owners while they were holding firearms. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI