Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan June 5, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been at least six train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Railroad defends its safety practices after Wolf sends scolding letter In a letter to Gov. Tom Wolf, Norfolk Southern said its safety measures exceed federal standards. The railroad wrote it in response to Wolf’s accusations that the company wasn’t doing enough to prevent crude oil trains from derailing in Pennsylvania, according to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Trains probably won’t get “smarter” this year A bill introduced in Congress in March seeks to extend a deadline on a rule that requires the nation’s freight lines to implement positive train control by the end of 2015. PTC uses wireless signals to enforce speed limits and can control trains headed for crashes, but the railroad industry says the 2015 deadline is unrealistic, according to Fortune. New York steps up its rail safety game The Journal News reports New York state will help 21 counties better prepare for derailments and “worst-case scenarios” involving crude oil trains. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor *Interested in learning more about the risks of crude oil trains in Pennsylvania? Join us at 6:30 p.m. on June 17 for a panel discussion we’re hosting in Pittsburgh at Carnegie Mellon University. There will be refreshments and snacks! Sign up and learn more here. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan