Posted in On the beat , posts A majority of likely Pennsylvania voters are delaying retirement by Alexandra Kanik August 25, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A recent statewide telephone survey conducted by the AARP shows that many likely Pennsylvania voters worry about the financial security of their retirement. Most non-retirees surveyed have either already delayed retirement, or expect they’ll have to. The survey’s Economic Anxiety Index indicates non-retirees are significantly more uneasy than retired voters. The Index uses five component concerns to evaluate the levels of apprehension of registered voters who are expected to participate in the November gubernatorial election. Retirees and non-retirees alike worry most about high taxes. Survey respondents also ranked their anxieties about living costs, health expenses, financial security, and not having enough money to pay for in-home care or a nursing home for themselves or a spouse. Voters 50+ in Pennsylvania want elected officials to make affordable at-home care a priority. Overwhelmingly, voters disagree with lawmakers’ recent decisions to redirect lottery proceeds to nursing homes instead of at-home care. From the AARP survey results : Voters want more support for caregiving so that the elderly and people with disabilities can live independently. Caregivers and those who have received care constitute an important emerging constituency. In addition, the majority of voters believe PA lottery funds should be used to pay for at-home care, as opposed to care provided in a nursing home. Caregiving is defined in the survey as providing unpaid care for an adult loved one who is ill, elderly, or has a disability. Caregivers assist with all kinds of chores: bathing and dressing, meal preparation, and managing medical care, to name a few. Most 50+ voters are concerned about caregiving. Seventy-three percent of 50+ voters have been caregivers in the past, are likely to be caregivers in the future, or are currently caregivers, according to the survey. Reach Molly Duerig at 724-799-4098 or mollyduerig@gmail.com. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.