Posted in DATA , IN-DEPTH , PUBLIC SAFETY Many accidents at slides at Seven Springs by Emily DeMarco and Natasha Khan August 14, 2013 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The scar on Steve Bowers’ arm shows where he was injured at Seven Springs in Southwestern Pennsylvania. (Photo by Taylor Norton for PublicSource) Steve Bowers of Cincinnati can no longer close his fist all the way after a hunk of his arm was scooped out during an accident in 2012 at Seven Springs Mountain Resort in Southwestern Pennsylvania. Since 2008, according to state records, there have been 17 accidents, including Bowers’s on the Alpine Slide, twin tracks that riders go down on a sled. Bowers, 56, said his sled flipped and his arm hit the hard surface of the track. He called for help, cradling flaps of his skin with his uninjured arm, he said. “It took a big chunk of meat out” of his right arm, he said. A medical bill described his arm as “shredded.” Ride operators did not have cell phones, according to Bowers’s account, and the scene was chaotic. By the time an ambulance arrived 30 minutes later, the ride was running again, he said. A ride must be inspected after a serious accident, according to state law. Seven Springs has multiple private inspectors and the slides are inspected daily, according to Anna Weltz, a spokeswoman for Seven Springs. The accident was reported to the state and Seven Springs filed all of its safety inspection reports, according to a PublicSource investigation. Steve Bowers can no longer completely close his fist and has about 80 percent of his previous strength following an accident at Seven Springs. (Photo by Taylor Norton for PublicSource) Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Riders on the slide control their speed with a brake lever and are instructed on its use, Weltz wrote in an email. “All riders are cautioned not to travel too fast down the track, but accidents can happen.” But Bowers said he was not instructed about how to control the sled or cautioned about speed. Helmets were not provided and he said he saw kids riding the slides. “There’s no safety instruction. There’s nothing. You’re on your own,” Bowers said. Bowers has about 80 percent of his previous strength and can no longer hit his punching bag, he said. Medical bills totaling thousands of dollars, including for surgeries and rehabilitation, have been paid by his insurance company. He said he has not decided whether to sue the park. Reach Emily DeMarco at 412-315-0262 or edemarco@publicsource.org or Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan