Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY , The aftermath of murder Join us for an event by Natasha Khan July 11, 2016 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X “In six years, Pittsburgh police have solved only half the murders in the city. A staggering 97% of unsolved murders had a black victim.” Those statistics are pulled from PublicSource’s recent investigation looking at unsolved murders in Pittsburgh. The project created a lot of discussion in our communities, and we’d like to further that conversation. Join us from 3 to 5 p.m. July 31 at the Bible Center Church in Homewood for an afternoon of solidarity and community as storytellers and performers from around the city come together to share their experiences with neighborhood violence and healing. Featuring a spoken-word performance from 1Hood’s Idasa Tariq , as well as storytellers from the organizations MAD DADS , JAMAR Place of Peace , Mothers Against Conviction of the Innocent , and the Afro-American Music Institute . Youth programming for children pre-K and above to be provided by WQED and Pittsburgh Filmmakers Youth Media . Light refreshments will be served. This event is free and open to the public. Check out our Facebook event page to let us know if you can join, for updates and discussion on the event. We hope to see you there. #healingpgh Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan