Posted in Equity , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Join the conversation on race, media and diversity by Jeffrey Benzing September 15, 2016 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X As Pittsburgh marches forward with bright ideas, new projects and self-driving cars, huge gulfs in opportunity persist between white and black residents. As media, we cover this divide, but we’re not detached from the issue and have a choice to either be part of the solution or stay with the status quo. This involves everyday decisions such as who is quoted in a story and how they’re portrayed, along with larger issues like the diversity of newsrooms that are supposed to hold leaders and institutions accountable for inequality. To raise awareness, the Pittsburgh Black Media Federation and Point Park University’s Center for Media Innovation are hosting an important discussion Sept. 21 on newsroom diversity and coverage of race. PublicSource reporter Jeffrey Benzing will discuss our recent project on unsolved murders and the importance of context when looking at the impact of violence on Pittsburgh’s black communities. The panel will also feature Kristen Doerschner, assistant managing editor at the Beaver County Times, Rod Doss, editor and publisher of the New Pittsburgh Courier and Scott Trabandt, managing editor at WPXI. Former KDKA-TV reporter Harold Hayes will moderate. Washington Post reporters Keith Alexander and Wesley Lowery will discuss their Pulitzer Prize-winning series on police shootings. Because of their work, an accurate count of police shootings of citizens finally exists. Their series examined racial disparities in shootings and showed how badly the federal government had handled or rather mishandled reporting of these deadly incidents. Space is limited, so RSVP now . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice , Diversity , Overlooked communities