Posted in Economy & Housing After finding a home in Pittsburgh, a paralegal helps others navigate housing difficulties by Ryan Loew November 15, 2021 November 17, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Rafael Bullones knows firsthand the hardships immigrants can face when looking for a place to live. The 31-year-old, who moved to the United States from Venezuela in 2014, initially struggled and without some help, he said, it’s likely he could have ended up without a home at all. Housing issues can abound for immigrants, he said. They may lack a credit score or could still be looking for employment while searching for housing. They can face discrimination and abusive landlords, he said. Language barriers can also make a difficult situation that much tougher. Now Bullones is helping others overcome the obstacles. As a paralegal and outreach coordinator for the Community Justice Project, a nonprofit legal assistance firm, much of his job involves helping people navigate these complicated housing issues, connecting them to resources like rent relief, providing translation services and assisting in cases where residents may be living in substandard conditions . He also helps residents find resources and solutions regarding lead poisoning in homes. Regardless of where they’re living, he said immigrants should know “they still have rights and they can demand to live in good conditions.” The North Side resident plans to keep the Pittsburgh area his home, hoping to practice law and eventually own a farm. Bullones is an avid chess player and can often be found playing Downtown. He also practices ashtanga yoga and officiates the occasional wedding. Ryan Loew is PublicSource’s visual storyteller/producer and can be reached at ryan@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ryanloew . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: development , housing , Pittsburgh Ryan Loew ryan@publicsource.org x Ryan is a PublicSource visual producer/storyteller. He joined PublicSource after being a freelance producer of news features and documentary stories in the Pittsburgh region and beyond. His work appeared... More by Ryan Loew