Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts PublicSource names its new development director by Mila Sanina September 27, 2016 January 16, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Chrystal Walsh, development manager at Family Services of Western Pennsylvania and a fundraising professional with 15 years of nonprofit experience, has been named the development director of PublicSource. Before Family Services, Walsh worked for the statewide chapter of Prevent Child Abuse Pennsylvania during the Jerry Sandusky child sex abuse scandal. The program became a beneficiary of canning efforts at Penn State University and later coordinated the “Pinwheels for Prevention” garden with the College of Liberal Arts to raise awareness of child abuse in observance of Child Abuse Prevention and Awareness month. Previously, Walsh worked in California for KQED Public Broadcasting and Mother Jones Magazine. “I am excited to bring my Bay Area work experience with Mother Jones magazine and KQED Public Broadcasting to nonprofit, investigative journalism in Pittsburgh, “ Walsh said. “Many Pittsburgh-based and national journalism foundations already make substantial donations to PublicSource. Under the leadership of Mila Sanina, PublicSource’s  executive director, we will diversify our funding base with new corporate and individual support for PublicSource’s reporting that is relevant to our city and its residents. “I will dedicate myself to building financial sustainability so our reporting team can focus on the in-depth storytelling and community dialogue, vital things which are too often missing in the current media environment,” Walsh said. We are thrilled to have Chrystal join our team. Her experience, skills and passion for our mission are exactly what we’ve been looking for to grow PublicSource. We look forward to working with her on building relationships with major donors, our community, corporate sponsors and underwriters. PublicSource is a nonprofit organization founded in 2011 and currently supported by The Pittsburgh Foundation, The Heinz Endowments, Hillman Family Foundations, Richard King Mellon Foundation, Colcom Foundation and Ethics and Excellence in Journalism. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Mila Sanina msanina@publicsource.org x Mila Sanina served from 2016-2021 as the executive director of PublicSource, a nonprofit, non-partisan newsroom delivering public-service journalism in the Pittsburgh region at publicsource.org. Under... More by Mila Sanina