Her Story Relationships can tear you down and lift you up. Jayla Wright, age 18, Homestead June 26, 2017 Jayla Wright, 18, is a graduate of Propel Andrew Street High School. (Photo by Njaimeh Njie/PublicSource) Without my relationships, I would not be who I am today. Everyone says that you make decisions based on your experiences. My experiences just so happen to include a few bad relationships. But without the bad experiences, I would not know just how good I have it now. I’m lucky to have the parts of family I am still extremely close to because not many people have that. My family is who I am. It’s possible that I could be a completely different person without their influence. Perhaps I never would have been allowed to be my true self. One such relative who has had a great impact on my life and who I am today is my grandmother, Linda Crowder. Her age is unknown to me because she gives me a different number each time. She has been a second mother to me when my mother had to work long hours to support me and my siblings. I tell my grandmother everything! From school drama to boys. Now, since I’ve graduated, I talk to her a lot about how nervous I am to become an adult. We have many funny moments like me sitting in the front seat of the car when she’s driving and slap boxing with her in the middle of traffic. Of course, I’m gentle, but I can’t say the same about her. My grandmother has taught me that a person’s good qualities can often outweigh the bad, and I will always love her no matter what. I am also very dedicated to my close circle of friends. They are everything to me because they give me the confidence I need when I don’t find it within myself. My friends are a reality show in themselves. I can always count on them to make me laugh even in difficult times, and I try to do the same for them. Siobhan Robinson, 17, has always been a close friend of mine. Our friendship was tested when our class schedules became total opposites. We grew distant. I remember during that time seeing her in the halls, looking upset. I wanted to know what was wrong, though I couldn’t expect her to just open up when we were barely talking at the time. Despite that, she did open up and tell me what was upsetting her. She depended on my loyalty and that I would care. At that moment, I knew I loved and valued her and our friendship because I felt that I would always want to be there for her. And, luckily for me, she is always by my side when I need her to be. Ilana Hill, 16, is another story. I was forced to befriend her! Not only is she one of my best friends, but she is also my cousin. We tell each other everything, and I can always count on her to keep it confidential. We have had our issues at times, but we always find our way back to each other. She gives me a hard time about my boyfriend, and it can get frustrating. But I realize she is hard on him because she cares about me. These are the people who make me laugh and cry and experience every other emotion possible, and I couldn’t be more grateful for them. Jayla Wright is 18 and a lifelong Homestead resident. She will attend Seton Hill University and plans to major in musical performance and something else that she has not decided on yet. She hopes to enter the music business, but, if all fails, she plans to be a novelist. Their Stories Tyneisha continues quest to prove herself as a parent with a disability, but she could still lose her son ‘Young Black Pittsburgh’ ambassadors connect with the girls who shared their stories through letters The vicious cycle inside Allegheny County juvenile court for black girls and their mothers. I saw it up close. Tiara Tabb: In this black-or-white world, I want to find the gray area 360 Video: Priya is a teen roboticist interested in how robots can revolutionize medicine Tyneisha thinks her disability shouldn’t disqualify her from motherhood Being 16: Janae turns to poetry to make art out of struggle Shaunese Johnson: Schools teach the same black history over and over. Students deserve better. Pittsburgh has a severe shortage of black teachers and that’s hurting black students. Tamia Law: Living in Clairton: ‘Nobody really cares unless it is football’ Getting in the game: Physical activity is a win-win for black girls Pittsburgh’s black girls face lots of inequity barriers. Advocates want tangible change. Corrine Jasmin: They say I’m pretty — for a black girl. Dezmaire gave birth in eighth grade. As a teen mom in Pittsburgh, she’s fighting to beat the odds and graduate. Maia Ervin: I am black, I am a student, and I’m tired of racism on my campus Zoe Vongtau: ‘I hid my accent and culture. I was just always the new black girl.’ She lost her mom and her home. How Monet is finding a promising future in Pittsburgh. 11-year-old Keliyah wants to be a lawyer, sings a special song If everyone got screened, gifted education in Pittsburgh could be more equitable. School officials aren’t sold. When some students are labeled as gifted, I see the harm done to those left behind Who gets to be considered ‘gifted’ in Pittsburgh schools?  Too few black girls. Donise Griffin: Why don’t more students at Pittsburgh’s Gifted Center look like me? Videos: Six women speak about the outlook for black girls in Pittsburgh Do black girls pay a higher price when comprehensive sex education isn’t taught? Amariah Woodson: Racism can be difficult to prove, but I think it happened to me Sienna Rodriguez-Truley: The parts of me that can’t be mixed and matched There are ways to end the school-to-prison pipeline Relive the Gwen’s Girls Equity Summit through what was discussed on social media Gwen’s Girls summit highlights how suspensions derail black girls’ education A story of two girls: Why being black means more scrutiny and punishment in Pittsburgh schools How institutions and society fail Pittsburgh’s black girls