To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video Failing the Future Is the way Pennsylvania funds public education the reason some students are left behind? "I wish my school had..." To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video About this project: In Pennsylvania, a state with 500 school districts, the funding crisis of public education is not a breaking news story. It's been the reality for years. Students study in decaying buildings, can only dream about art classes and fight the stigma of being from "that school."  The crisis of funding public education is imminent as the court is set to look into how Pennsylvania funds public education and if it violates the State Constitution. In this series, we explore deepening inequities across school districts and ask: Will the school funding crisis in Pa. ever be solved? Stories As PA’s education funding lawsuit waits for 2020 hearing, here’s how similar lawsuits nationally have fared. Without additional funding or will to merge, some Southwestern PA school districts try sharing resources to offer students more opportunities In resource-poor districts, vital STEAM resources are hard to come by Some Southwestern PA universities help students from under-resourced districts learn key college skills PA’s secretary of education visits Sto-Rox to address disparities faced by students Teachers find ways to provide basic school supplies for Pittsburgh-area students in needy districts Financial gaps among Allegheny County school districts are numerous. How funding affects everything from musicals to safety. Chart: How much each Allegheny County school district brings in per student through property taxes Once-thriving Clairton sits next to booming West Jefferson Hills. Their children are learning an early lesson on inequality. Has there been a return to ‘pauper schools’ in Pennsylvania? A brief history of public education in the state. Video: PublicSource LIVE interview with Sto-Rox teachers Suellen and Ben Engelhard on inequitable school funding PA’s secretary of education discusses school inequities and the court case aiming to diminish them Two adjacent districts. Different academic worlds. The story of Sto-Rox and Montour. Sto-Rox parent: ‘I get embarrassed… It just reminds me of the failure that I am for my kids.’ I teach at Sto-Rox high school. I am tired of telling my students we cannot give them more. Is Pennsylvania’s school funding unfair? This lawsuit hopes to upend the model. Coming soon in this series Follow our education reporting at https://www.publicsource.org/education/