Posted in Daily report , posts August 6, 2015 by PublicSource contributor August 6, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Murrysville doctor says he had permits Jan C. Seski, a local oncologist accused of poaching in Zimbabwe in April, said he had permits to hunt the lion that he killed and wasn’t in the country at the time wildlife authorities say he was. Pittsburgh: Man charged with double homicide Police charged Cesar Mazza with beating and stabbing his former girlfriend and her grandmother to death on Tuesday. Authorities say Mazza was angry that his girlfriend wouldn’t name their newborn son after him. Pittsburgh: Target stabber could go to mental health facility Leon Raymond Walls, who was found guilty of a stabbing rampage in East Liberty’s Target in 2013, will likely be sentenced to a mental health facility, a judge said Tuesday. Sentencing is scheduled for Aug. 13. Statewide: Hospitals hit with readmission penalties Hospitals across the state are being penalized by the feds for preventable readmissions of patients. Harrisburg: Wolf backs Clean Power Plan Gov. Tom Wolf said he supports President Obama’s environmental goals to force power plants to reduce greenhouse gases despite resistance from Republicans and others who want the market to avoid more regulation. Somerset: Man who set up fake DUI checkpoint stands trial On May 30, a drunken Logan Shaulis claimed he was a state trooper and demanded to see a driver’s license, registration and insurance papers of another motorist. Shaulis waived a preliminary hearing on Tuesday. NATIONAL Netflix offers unlimited parental leave The streaming service is granting up to a year of paid parental leave to new parents. The company’s chief talent officer wrote that Netflix wants employees to be able to balance their family needs without worrying about work and finances. Reviews of Clinton’s emails commence The FBI has begun an investigation into the private email account that Hillary Clinton used when she was Secretary of State. Four of the 30,000 emails that Clinton handed over for review contained classified information . Tennessee theater shooting A gunman wearing a surgical mask and also wielding a hatchet opened fire in an Antioch theater Wednesday, but early media reports show no fatal injuries other than the attacker whose name had not been made public yet. Debris is from lost jetliner The aircraft wreckage discovered on the island of Reunion last week is from Malaysia Airlines Flight 370, experts say. Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak said the debris is evidence that the plane “tragically ended” in the Indian Ocean. Earlier media reports had said the parts were not from the missing plane. Pope urges church to be tolerant of divorce Pope Francis said the Catholic church should be more accepting of Catholics who divorce and get remarried. He added that churches shouldn’t treat remarried Catholics as if they were “excommunicated.” Freediver feared dead After Russian freediving champion Natalia Molchanva dove off a Spanish island near Ibiza, she never resurfaced . She is feared to be dead, and as of Wednesday afternoon, there was no sign of her. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor IN OTHER NEWS Will Pennsylvania start “pre-sentencing”? According to the website FiveThirtyEight , Pennsylvania may begin to base criminal sentences not only on crimes that a person has been convicted of, but also whether they are likely to commit more crimes in the future. Pennsylvania would be the first to accept this reform. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.