Posted in Daily report , posts August 25, 2015 by Swalsh August 24, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Norristown: AG Kane ordered to trial A judge ordered Pennsylvania Attorney General Kathleen Kane to go to trial on charges of perjury and obstruction of justice following a preliminary hearing. Kane maintains her innocence. Pittsburgh: Airline closes Moon location U.S. Airways closed its Pittsburgh operations center to merge with American Airlines. More than 300 workers at the Moon location will be relocated to Texas. Pittsburgh: City continues suit against oversight group The Intergovernmental Cooperation Authority, which is currently involved in a suit with Pittsburgh, denied the city access to records. The city is accusing the Authority of withholding millions of dollars in gambling funds from 2014 and 2015. Pittsburgh: City receives environmental grant Pittsburgh is one of 10 cities that will receive $25,000 as part of Obama’s Resilience AmeriCorps initiative. The money will fund local plans to address climate change and economic challenges. West Chester: Bacterial disease found on college campus Officials at West Chester University outside Philadelphia have discovered legionella bacteria in the hot water systems and treated them. Classes started Monday and officials said there was no need for immediate concern. Allentown: IndyCar driver in coma Justin Wilson, who sustained a serious head injury from flying debris at Pocono Raceway, remains in critical condition in a Lehigh Valley hospital. The British driver has often spoken about safety on the tracks. NATIONAL Stock markets tumble U.S. stock markets were down nearly 4 percent following upheavals in China’s markets. Obama leaves golf behind President Obama was scheduled to give the keynote speach at the eighth National Clean Energy Summit in Las Vegas. The White House also announced new investments to improve sustainability programs . Three Americans who thwarted train attack honored by French Three Americans and one Briton were awarded France’s Legion of Honor medal after their “exceptional courage” in taking down a man who attacked passengers on a train bound for Paris last week. Four people were hurt in the train debacle, but the men prevented a full-scale terrorist attack. Wildfires erupt near California ski resort A fire around Snow Summit Ski Resort in Big Bear prompted officials to evacuate homes and schools. Wildfires continued throughout the West because of drought conditions. Panda babies in fragile condition Staffers at the National Zoo are watching over the twin cubs of Mei Xiang, a giant panda. The tiny, hairless cubs are the result of an April artificial insemination. IN OTHER NEWS It’s a small world Street artist Banksy opened Dismaland , an anti-Disneyland creation, in England. The installation features Banksy and about 60 other artists in a dark, theme park-esque satire. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI