Posted in On the beat , posts , The aftermath of murder , VIDEO Elementary students protest neighborhood violence by Jeffrey Benzing February 17, 2016 July 31, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Feb. 17, 2016: In an effort to raise awareness of community violence, students at Pittsburgh Lincoln elementary school held an outdoor rally and peace march on Wednesday morning. The event was organized by students in grades 3-5 as part of their project-based learning curriculum; the students voted to focus efforts on crime in their neighborhoods and police brutality. At the event, students spoke and sang, sharing the message that crime and violence won’t be tolerated. With a police escort, the students marched with signs around the Larimer neighborhood. State Rep. Ed Gainey, D-Lincoln-Lemington — whose sister was murdered in Homewood last month — spoke to the group, along with other community leaders, including Pittsburgh Police Zone 5 Commander Jason Lando. Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto visited students after their march. In the Aftermath of Murder series , PublicSource with partner 90.5 WESA dedicated a month of coverage to the disproportionate impact violence and homicide has on the city’s black communities. Lincoln’s third-grade students studied the series and hosted reporter Jeffrey Benzing last week for a conversation about the project. Reach Jeffrey Benzing at 412-315-0265 or at jbenzing@publicsource.org. Follow him on Twitter @jabenzing. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI