Posted in Environment Text Good River: Our reporters want to hear your Ohio River stories and concerns Text “OHIO” to 412-528-6575 to share with our seven-newsroom collaborative. by PublicSource contributor October 21, 2019 October 22, 2019 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource is teaming up with six other news organizations to cover what often seems to be the most underappreciated water asset in the country: the Ohio River. The Ohio River provides drinking water for five million people, and it’s a thoroughfare of business, supporting jobs and communities. But it’s also commonly cited as the most polluted river in the United States. Our project, entitled Good River: Stories of the Ohio, will delve into the past, present and future of this watershed region and aim to educate and surprise you at the same time. Our journalism will share with you the beauty of the Ohio River and its watershed (e.g. epic scenery and close-up wildlife) as well as the threats facing it. You can help our seven-newsroom coalition tell stories that envision a better future for the Ohio. The project will launch Nov. 14, but you can start participating now! Introducing Good River texts. Here’s how it works: Text “OHIO” to 412-528-6575. (Note that standard message rates apply and you can opt out anytime by texting STOP.) Follow the prompts to introduce yourself to us. Share your story, tip, concern, question or photo with us. We’ll text you with questions and information in return. (You can opt out easily if you hit your max on Ohio River knowhow.) You can also submit your phone number here if you want us to text you with updates. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI