Posted in Daily report , posts The Daily Report: August 3, 2015 by Jeffrey Benzing August 2, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Zimbabwe officials investigating local doc Zimbabwe national park authorities are reportedly investigating a Murrysville doctor for allegedly illegally killing a lion with a bow and arrow. The killing of Cecil the lion by a Minnesota dentist sparked international outrage. Now local gynecologic oncologist Dr. Jan Seski has been accused in a similar killing. The Post-Gazette could not reach Seski for comment. Pittsburgh: Dems choose Arnet for Senate race The Allegheny County Democratic Committee has picked Heather Arnet to face Guy Reschenthaler in a race for the state senate seat vacated by Democrat Matt Smith. Arnet has been CEO of the Women and Girls Foundation for more than a decade. Smith left the Senate to run the Greater Pittsburgh Chamber of Commerce. Western PA: Suitors may pass on ‘healthcare behemoths’ Consolidation is a big trend in health insurance. But an intense, highly publicized feud between UPMC and Highmark might persuade out-of-state companies to avoid joining forces with either. Any merger proposal would be followed by close regulatory scrutiny – not an entirely attractive prospect. Statewide: Fair hiring bill proposed Under a proposed state bill , potential employers won’t be allowed to ask applicants about juvenile or summary offenses if there was no conviction. Rep. Leslie Acosta, a Democrat sponsor, said even a modest criminal history “inhibits that individual from possibly obtaining that job, even if they have the qualifications.” NATIONAL Obama to limit greenhouse pollution An aggressive new federal regulation requires states to greatly reduce emissions from coal-burning power plants. The rule, which will be formally adopted Monday, requires a 32 percent drop in carbon emissions from 2005 levels by the year 2030. Legal challenges are highly likely. President Biden? Does Joe Biden want to drop the “vice” and make a cross-town move to the White House ? Biden and associates are “actively exploring” the possibility, according to the New York Times. If Biden joins the raise, he would directly challenge Hillary Rodham Clinton, seen by many as the party’s inevitable nominee. 25 years (and counting) in Iraq Sunday was the 25th anniversary of Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait. The United States responded with a broad coalition and a quick victory. NPR looks at the numerous political and military strategies the U.S. has adopted since then — and the reasons we’re still fighting. IN OTHER NEWS Ronda won the fight It only took 34 seconds for UFC bantamweight champ Ronda Rousey to knock out Brazil’s Bethe Correia on home turf in Rio de Janeiro. Before Saturday, Rousey’s three most recent title defenses lasted a total of 96 seconds combined. The daily report was compiled by Jeffrey Benzing. You can reach him with questions or suggestions at jbenzing@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.