Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts PublicSource Event: ‘The Invisible War’ by swalsh November 8, 2012 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource is hosting an event that will include the showing of “The Invisible War,” the Sundance Film Festival award-winning documentary by Kirby Dick . It is about women in the military who have been raped or assaulted by fellow soldiers. The film will be followed by a panel discussion with veterans and experts. When: Thursday, November 29, 6:30 p.m. Where: Pittsburgh Center for the Arts Marshall Building – Simmons Hall 6300 Fifth Avenue (at Fifth and Shady Aves.) Pittsburgh, PA 15232 The event and parking are free. View the trailer here. This event is a continuation of the Coming Home PA , a project about veterans’ return to civilian life spearheaded by PublicSource and reported in cooperation with its local media partners. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.