Posted in Equity How a Seneca Valley student tries to ease poverty in her family’s native Sri Lanka by Photos and story by Heather Mull March 11, 2019 May 30, 2019 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Hiruni Singhabahu Herat, 17, speaks in Singhala to students of the Keselhenawa Junior School outside of Pugoda, Sri Lanka. However, the girls were excited to practice their English lessons with an American. Seneca Valley High School senior Hiruni Herat earns good grades, plays clarinet in marching band and works weekends at a donut shop. But beyond a typical teenage life in Cranberry Township, she’s running a nonprofit called the Close to My Heart Foundation to ease poverty in her family’s native Sri Lanka. Last spring, Hiruni’s friends sat in her living room surrounded by more than 1,000 pairs of spectacles, trying them on while giggling, sorting, cleaning and wrapping them for transport on the family’s 22-hour flight from Pittsburgh to the small island nation. She collected the used eyeglasses for a free clinic she helped to organize at her grandfather’s house during their trip. The foundation also raised $4,000 to fund the construction of a science lab for the small, rural Palpita Primary School in the town of Pugoda. “When Hiruni told me, ‘I want to have a nonprofit,’ I assumed it would be when she gets a job and is older. Like, in the future,” joked her mother Dilrukshika Singhabahu, who goes by ‘Dil.’ Hiruni counters: “People always tell you to follow your dreams, so I don’t see why I can’t do that now.” Schoolgirls at Palpita School test out the new microscopes in the science lab building. With a brand new interior, floors and furniture, the science lab is the only classroom at the school that is enclosed by windows; all other classrooms at the school are contained inside open air pavilions with screening covering the windows. The new science lab at Palpita School cost $4,000 to renovate from the original open pavilion. Inside, it has tile floors, new walls, windows, ventilation, tables, textbooks and models. Hiruni jokes with students inside the new science lab at Palpita School. Though the school is co-educational, through the lab, Hiruni hopes to encourage more girls to excel in STEM subject areas and go on to higher education. To set up the foundation she launched in fall 2017, Hiruni bought the book “Nonprofit Kit for Dummies” and the family contacted the Alliance for Nonprofit Resources in nearby Butler for assistance. With help from her parents, she put together a board of directors and a student advisory council. “Since we’re not 18,” Hiruni said, “they can only be a non-voting member of the board, but I have friends who have become very passionate about this and want to help.” Hiruni enlisted her friends to call Cranberry restaurants like Chipotle and Denny’s to get them to give the foundation a cut of sales during “dining for dollars” events. She pitched at breakfast meetings to local Rotary Clubs, organized skating fundraisers at the UPMC Lemieux Sports Complex and set up eyeglass donation boxes at Walmart, the Pittsburgh Buddhist Center and Linda Midcap’s Hair Gallery. At the Walmart Vision Center on Route 19 in Cranberry, Hiruni stops by to check with optician Susan Hardt and collect eyeglass donations from the box she left there for her nonprofit Close To My Heart Foundation. Even though Walmart collects used eyeglasses for vision care services sponsored by The Lions Club fraternal organization, Hardt still kindly accepted Hiruni’s much smaller donation box and put it at the front of the store where it could draw attention. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Hiruni’s idea started informally when she was eighth grade, with a pen-pal campaign between students from Evans City Middle School and Palpita School. Hiruni had arranged the campaign to fulfill a yearlong gifted program project. Throughout the school year, she collected donations of backpacks and school supplies and then, on her family’s yearly trip to Sri Lanka in the summer of 2015, she delivered them to Palpita students. She said she was scared at first because she was not fluent enough in Singhala to give a lengthy talk, but her grandfather helped by talking to the students first. Then she joined in. “I started making conversation with students and pretty soon the entire school was sitting around me asking questions about America,” she said. “What struck me was that they weren’t that much different than me and my friends. “They’re very poor but they’re very grateful for everything they have. I was hooked on helping this school and doing everything I could because they deserve the kind of education that we are getting here.” Hiruni’s friends from Seneca Valley High School gathered at her house in early June 2018, to help sort, clean and wrap donated pairs of eyeglasses collected throughout the previous year. In total, Close to My Heart Foundation provided more than 1,000 pairs of glasses for the August clinic. Hiruni tries on a pair of sunglasses and laughs with her friends as they clean, sort and wrap donated eyeglasses for the upcoming summer clinic in Pugoda, Sri Lanka. In Sri Lanka, nearly half the population lives on fewer than $5 a day, according to the World Bank. That information led Hiruni to her next project. The outdoor school recently got electricity and needed a photocopier and printer to provide students with study guides and worksheets. Hiruni raised $1,000 and made arrangements for the machine’s purchase and delivery. When Hiruni returned to Sri Lanka the summer of 2017, along with checking in on the new copy machine at the school, she’d been asked by Palpita’s principal Anoma Sajeewani to design a leadership workshop for students, which she planned and conducted with the help of her parents and grandfather. Walter Singhabahu, 89, relaxes in a traditional Sri Lankan sarong inside the courtyard of his Pugoda home. Many local Sinhalese men, old and young, prefer the comfort of the sarong to pants or shorts because of the island’s tropical heat and humidity. “One of the fun things we did was teach them to eat rice and curry with a fork and spoon,” Hiruni said. “Typically, you eat curry with your hands, so we set up this big buffet and sat down to eat lunch together, but you had to eat with the spoons and forks.” She described it as fun and humorous but also something she said could be beneficial if students are eating a meal with a potential employer. “They loved the challenge,” she said. After the photocopier arrived, Principal Sajeewani reported that the passage rate for national exams required at the school increased “from 30 percent to 85 percent,” an improvement credited to the school’s new ability to print past exams for practice. Compared to wealthier peers, poor children in Sri Lanka ages 15 to 16 are almost three times more likely to leave formal education, according to a 2017 report by The Institute for Policy Studies of Sri Lanka. That can lead to “rampant unemployment,” particularly in the country’s rural areas, according to a 2018 report from the Seattle-based Borgen Project, which studies extreme poverty. In Sri Lanka, more than a quarter of youth ages 15 to 24 are either not employed or not receiving education or work training, according to the report. Palpita’s new science lab, dedicated on Aug. 1, 2018, is the tangible manifestation of the mission statement Hiruni wrote for her foundation : “Working to provide equal opportunity to underprivileged populations with education, health, and social equality.” The view looking north upon Colombo Plan Road along the Indian Ocean in Sri Lanka’s capital city of Colombo. Hiruni’s parents grew up and met in Colombo, which is being quickly redeveloped as Sri Lanka’s economy improves. Students of the Keselhenawa Junior School are shy but curious about their American visitor, Hiruni. As a guest of honor, Hiruni presented a short speech she prepared for students, parents and teachers at Palpita School during the dedication of the science lab she funded through her organization, Close to My Heart Foundation. The Palpita Primary School is just past the town crematorium, about a mile and a half from the house of Hiruni’s grandparents, Walter and Indrani Singhabahu. The green cement home sits behind a busy lottery stand on the main road through Pugoda village in Sri Lanka’s Western Province, about 20 miles northeast of the capital city of Colombo. Bands of monkeys roam through king coconut treetops between buildings. The Kelani River flows behind the village, feeding the skinny, sap-seeping trees of Salawa Rubber Plantation and channeling off into sweet-smelling rice paddies. Driving across a bridge, people can be seen below, bathing and washing laundry and, during the dry season when the river is low, men wade among the protruding rocks panning for tiny bits of gold. Hiruni’s parents left Sri Lanka in 1994, a month after they married. They moved to  the United States, so her dad, Athula, could attend a physics Ph.D. program at the University of Cincinnati. Hiruni was born in Cincinnati, Ohio, in 2001. She’s lived in Western Pennsylvania since she was 3, when her father was offered a professorship at Slippery Rock University. In Sri Lanka, her parents both witnessed the atrocities, chaos and destruction during the country’s brutal 25-year civil war. The war  started in 1983 as the Sinhalese majority run government and Tamil separatist insurgents tangled in a chaotic series of battles all over the island country. An only child, Hiruni Singhabahu Herat, 17, stands between her father, Athula, and mother, Dilrukshika, in the courtyard of her maternal grandparents’ home in Pugoda. Dilrukshika wears a traditional Sinhalese sari for the opening ceremony of Palpita School’s new science lab, built and funded by Hiruni’s nonprofit Close To My Heart Foundation on Aug. 1, 2018. Dil’s parents moved to Pugoda after Walter, now 89, took early retirement as superintendent in the national prison system. He retired, in part, because of uprisings inside prisons during the war. Pugoda was not seeing the same level of violence that was occurring in other parts of the country, which is just more than half the land area of Pennsylvania but contains almost 9 million more people. In Pugoda in 1988, Walter started a nonprofit to aid residents coping with poverty, together with a Dutch couple he’d met from Galle, a colonial fort city on the southwest coast. They called it Neder Lanka Aloka (meaning Netherlands, Sri Lanka, Light). The organization had several major undertakings, including helping to fund construction of more than 40 homes and identifying local children in financial need to be sponsored in Holland. But the organization’s first project was hosting a free eyeglasses clinic out of Walter’s house. Why eyeglasses? Although Sri Lanka has a government-funded national healthcare system, there are still many barriers to vision care, particularly in poor rural areas. One of the largest vision care needs is for inexpensive reading glasses. Uncorrected loss of vision disables reading ability and can correlate directly to loss of income, according to a 2016 report on blindness in aging Sri Lankans. Attendees at the Close To My Heart Foundation’s clinic show off their new eyewear. Uditha Chanaka (right), a young optometrist on the all-volunteer team, files through his case of lens equipment to test an older gentlemen’s prescription for reading glasses. Cleaned, donated prescription eyeglasses were spread out on tables for the August 2018 clinic. Those people who came but couldn’t be seen by an optometrist, due to time and the number of people who attended, were allowed to choose a pair of frames that they liked, which they could bring to the optometrists’ office later to have fitted with new lenses. An elderly woman has her prescription gauged by an optometrist. “Most people at clinics are really poor; they are needing to figure out shelter and food. Forget buying glasses,” said Heidi Weitz, owner of Heidi Optics in downtown Pittsburgh. In the United States, “people just grab them in the grocery stores. I don’t think we understand that level of poverty here.” Weitz donated 300 pairs of used glasses to Hiruni. Hiruni took inspiration from her grandfather’s first clinic 30 years ago, as well as her own experience in school. “I was thinking how at school each year we get our eyes checked to see if we need glasses,” she said. “I was thinking how it would be so hard to go through life or school without my contacts.” For now, like many American high school seniors, Hiruni is figuring out where she’ll be hitting the books next fall. She’s hoping her residency at the Pennsylvania Governor’s School last July, where she studied Arabic, will help her get into the universities where she plans to apply: American, Brown, Cornell, George Washington and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. She’s already been admitted to the University of Pittsburgh. Her focus will be international and global studies, economics and law. She’s also already planning for next summer’s trip to Pugoda. She is raising money for a new school, the Keselhenawa Junior School, to buy laptops, add electricity to one of the classrooms for a computer room and also to update the school’s toilets. For Palpita School, she will be meeting with Sri Lankan solar companies to get quotes for installing solar panels at the school. Her foundation also raised $4,000 to update toilets and showers for a hospital in the village. Construction was recently completed. Palpita lower school students join Hiruni for a selfie in their courtyard. While her grandfather waited until retirement to start his nonprofit, Hiruni sees the foundation as her life’s work. “I plan on doing this for the rest of my life, or as long as I can,” she said. At one time, she thought she might be a doctor. Her parents were pushing her to focus on math and science and it would be one way to help people. “But then I started doing this. Now, that’s all I can see myself doing,” she said. “Maybe it’ll be easier once I have a college degree and I’m not a teenager in Cranberry Township, but I’m really excited about it and I can’t wait to see what I can do.” Heather Mull is an editorial and commercial photographer based in Pittsburgh. She can be reached through her website at www.heathermull.com or at 412-901-1647. This story was fact-checked by Katie Farnan. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI