Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts What Obama’s new fracking regs will do by Natasha Khan March 23, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Obama administration has laid out its regulations for hydraulic fracturing on federal and tribal lands. The regs have been in the works for four years. “Current federal well-drilling regulations are more than 30 years old and they simply have not kept pace with the technical complexities of today’s hydraulic fracturing operations,” U.S. Department of Interior Secretary Jewell said in a statement. The rules, which go into effect in June, include the following: Require companies to publicly disclose the chemicals they use for fracking on the FracFocus website within 30 days after completing a frack. Require a validation of “well integrity and strong cement barriers between the wellbore [drill hole] and water zones through which the wellbore passes.” Require higher standards for wastewater storage. Require companies to submit more detailed information on the geology, depth and location of pre-existing wells in order to lower the risk of cross-well contamination with fracking chemicals and fluids. The new rules will cover about 100,000 oil and gas wells drilled on public lands. “As we continue to offer millions of acres of public lands for conventional and renewable energy production,” Jewell said, “it is absolutely critical the public have confidence that transparent and effective safety and environmental protections are in place.” FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The new rules will have little effect in Pennsylvania, according to a Pittsburgh Post-Gazette article. Although the Allegheny National Forest falls under federal jurisdiction, about 93 percent of the mineral rights in the forest are privately owned, which means they fall under state regulations. Almost as soon as the rules were released, groups within in the shale drilling industry filed a lawsuit against the regulations, which asked a court to set them aside. Environmental groups have also criticized the rules, saying the rules don’t go far enough and favor the industry too much. Read the rules here. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan