Posted in HEALTH , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Both Pittsburgh-area hospital networks were fined for medical waste violations by PublicSource contributor June 22, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The red bags in a Monroeville landfill were red flags for one resident. And they sparked a two-year investigation that has resulted in the Department of Environmental Protection [DEP] fining 12 UPMC hospitals $451,000 for violating the Solid Waste Management Act, according to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . The DEP investigation also found Allegheny Health Network in violation of the act, resulting in an $86,900 fine. On Dec. 17, 2013, a Monroeville resident notified the DEP of medical waste in a nearby landfill. DEP spokesman John Poister told PublicSource in an email that infectious medical waste includes “tissue, bloody dressings, sharps, tubing containing bodily fluids, and other operating room waste.” When medical waste is properly disposed of and treated, the red bags that hospital employees place the waste in is heat sterilized, a process that shrink-wraps waste inside the bags. The Pittsburgh Tribune-Review reported in February 2014: “The violations consisted of blood bags, surgical sponges and possible human tissue in red biohazard bags contained in trucks from the hospital. The DEP recorded violations for both UPMC and Allegheny General Hospital in December 2013 and January 2014. Poister recently told the Post-Gazette that the violations were not intentional, but resulted from inadequate training of employees. “This is such an unusual event,” he said. “The only other citation against a hospital [in this part of the state] occurred 15 years ago and it wasn’t as big” as the UPMC fine. Poister told PublicSource in an email: “On September 4, 1999, a large amount of unprocessed infection medical waste was observed in municipal waste transported to a local landfill. DEP inspectors determined that the material came from Allegheny General Hospital. They paid a $65,000 civil penalty.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Nationwide, the last high-profile string of untreated medical waste to be discovered and cited occurred in California in 2007 . Four hospital facilities in the San Jose area were investigated for infractions that occurred over the course of several weeks. As is the case with UMPC and the Allegheny Health Network, the violations in California were attributed to employee error . The Post-Gazette reports that both Pittsburgh-area hospitals said their medical waste disposal problems have been resolved. “UPMC has been working diligently to educate all staff about proper waste disposal and to ensure that all disposals are in compliance with regulations and DEP guidelines,” UPMC said in a statement. AHN spokesperson Dan Laurent told the Post-Gazette policies and procedures are now in place to ensure proper disposal of medical waste in the future. “We worked closely with the DEP to review and update our policies in response to this incident … and took immediate steps to re-educate and retrain staff at our facilities on proper waste disposal,” he said in a prepared statement. Poister said the DEP is continuing with follow-up inspections. Both health systems have paid their fines, he said. Christopher Reed is a PublicSource reporting intern. Reach him at creed@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Workplace safety