Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts PublicSource reporter promoted to managing editor by swalsh May 29, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Halle Stockton, a reporter with PublicSource for three years, has been promoted to managing editor. In her new role, Stockton will continue her coverage of healthcare, aging and people with disabilities. She will also be a frontline editor of stories by staff members and freelancers. “I’m looking forward to working more closely with the journalists in our newsroom and others in the state as we collaborate with our news partners,” Stockton said. PublicSource collaborates with 50 traditional news partners across the state, bringing them in-depth news and data. Other news organizations collaborate by working with PublicSource to provide reporting about their areas for statewide stories. In April, Stockton was honored with a national Sigma Delta Chi award from the Society of Professional Journalists (SPJ) for her story about a couple who both have cerebral palsy . For her project on workers with disabilities earning far below minimum wage, she won two first-place awards for investigative/enterprise reporting from the SPJ Keystone Pro Chapter and the Pennsylvania Women’s Press Association. PublicSource provides online news that seeks to educate the public about criminal justice, politics and money, the environment, the elderly and the disabled, and healthcare. In addition, it curates daily news from around the state in a Daily Report. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.