Posted in Election 2024 Live election results: Pennsylvania votes for president, Congress, state offices by Public Source November 5, 2024 November 5, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X This page will refresh automatically with live election returns from the Associated Press, along with the AP’s race calls for presidential, congressional and state elections. Polls close in Pennsylvania at 8 p.m. and at various times throughout the country. Navigate using the buttons below. National Statewide Congressional State House and Senate National results Return to top Pennsylvania statewide elections Pennsylvania voters will decide who receives the state’s 19 presidential Electoral College votes and elect a U.S. senator, attorney general, auditor general and treasurer. Return to top Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting U.S. House Two U.S. House seats for districts including parts of Allegheny County are up for grabs. The 12th District includes all of Pittsburgh, some suburbs and some of Westmoreland County, and the 17th District includes some suburbs and all of Beaver County. Return to top State House and Senate The results in the competitive 37th and 45th Pennsylvania Senate districts could determine which party controls the upper chamber in Harrisburg next year. There are 13 contested state House races in the county, which are crucial for control of that narrowly divided chamber. Only contested races are shown here. For other results, visit the county website. Return to top Democracy & Doubt Pittsburgh navigates trust and choice in the 2024 election season Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: 2024 election , Allegheny County , Election results , Elections , Pennsylvania , Pittsburgh