Posted in On the beat , posts How to get involved in adaptive sports by Alexandra Kanik April 25, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Want to learn more about adaptive sports? Here’s a list of local, state and national organizations that can help you get started: Achilles International provides training, events and community support. Reach out to the Pittsburgh chapter on Facebook here . Search by zip code to find your local adaptive sports group. The National Sports Center for the Disabled , based in Denver, Colo., organizes therapeutic sports and recreation outings and vacations for people with physical, intellectual and behavioral disabilities. The Pennsylvania Center for Adaptive Sports says it helps 500 people with disabilities every year get into adaptive sports. Find out about their programs and how to contact organizers here . Among other programs, Three Rivers Adaptive Sports holds a bowling event in Harmarville, Pa., every other Tuesday; $10 per person covers bowling, food and drink. Learn more on the group’s website . The Three Rivers Rowing Association has adaptive rowing & paddling outreach programs. The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs also promotes adaptive sports for veterans with disabilities. Disabled Sports USA has compiled a list of suppliers of adaptive sports equipment. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Disabilities