Posted in Daily report , posts June 1, 2015 by Eric Holmberg June 1, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Statewide: Political campaigns may be selling your data Political campaigns collect vast amounts of data about voters, but may sell that valuable data to pay off campaign debts . Harrisburg: Pa. Senate plans to send Wolf a balanced budget If Gov. Tom Wolf and the Republican-controlled Legislature can’t reach a compromise, the Pennsylvania Senate is willing to send the governor a balanced budget he’s unlikely to sign. Philadelphia: Williams discusses what went wrong in his mayoral defeat State Sen. Anthony Williams analyzes Philadelphia’s Democratic mayoral primary , which he lost to Jim Kenney. Beaver: Recounting the tornado of 1985 Thirty years ago, a deadly tornado ripped through Beaver County. Here are some of the stories from the deadliest storm in county history. Allentown: Talen Energy ready to launch Talen Energy’s CEO will ring the opening bell at the New York Stock Exchange on Tuesday as the company begins trading under the stock symbol TLN. The power generation company was spun off from PPL Corporation. NATIONAL Portions of the Patriot Act expire Provisions of the Patriot Act that allowed the National Security Agency to collect, in bulk, Americans’ phone records lapsed on Sunday night after the Senate could not reach a deal. Police killings nearing 400 so far this year At least 385 people have been killed by police in the first five months of 2015, which is more than twice the rate found in incomplete federal government records over the past decade. Former Taliban prisoners may be stuck in Qatar The five Guantánamo prisoners exchanged for Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl a year ago may not be allowed to leave Qatar , amid fears they could return to the battlefield in Afghanistan. IN OTHER NEWS Schieffer retires from ‘Face the Nation’ Veteran CBS journalist Bob Schieffer anchored his final broadcast of “Face the Nation” on Sunday, after 24 years of hosting the political talk show. Whaaaat? Kim Kardashian pregnant with second child On “Keeping Up with the Kardashians,” Kim Kardashian announced that she is pregnant with her second child. She and husband Kanye West also have a daughter North West, who is nearly two years old. The daily report was compiled by Eric Holmberg, a PublicSource reporter. Reach him with questions or suggestions at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.