Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan September 18, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Nominee to lawmakers: Deadline on railroads making brake updates will be enforced Obama’s pick to lead the Federal Railroad Administration told a U.S. Senate panel that her administration would enforce a Dec. 31 deadline established by a 2008 law that requires railroads to implement a braking technology called positive train control, according to The New York Times . Experts have said that the technology likely would have prevented the deadly Amtrak derailment in Philadelphia earlier this year. Senators fight for crude-by-rail safety U.S. senators from Minnesota and Wisconsin want railroads to be more transparent about when trains haul crude oil through cities, calling it a “common-sense measure,” according to The Twin Cities Daily Planet. Railroads refuse to provide more information on railroad bridges Despite a plea by the head of the federal rail agency to do so, railroad companies have refused to hand over more information to local officials about the structural integrity and safety conditions of thousands of railroad bridges, according to The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor New York cities update emergency response plans for oil trains After New York’s governor asked for a review of emergency response needs surrounding oil train crashes, environmental regulators are helping local emergency response officials along crude oil routes update plans, train firefighters and get more equipment, according to The Associated Press. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan