Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 31, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 31, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Preschools threaten to close amid budget impasse At least 19 preschools say they will temporarily close by Nov. 10 if the budget stalemate continues. An additional 16 say they will close if the state doesn’t have a budget by the end of December. Pittsburgh: Oil company to lay off thousands Chevron Corp. announced it would lay-off 6,000 to 7,000 workers nationwide by 2018. The company’s Moon Township office laid off 162 of 700 workers earlier this year. The company did not release details about the impact of the current layoffs on Moon employees. Harrisburg: Fewer prison fights Attacks inside Forest State Prison in Marienville dropped 40 percent after officials instituted a pilot program including a prison-wide lockdown procedure to curb fighting. Authorities are also working on new developments to keep inmates, once they’re released, from returning to jail. Allentown: Aftermath of after-school fight Four officers are injured and at least five juveniles arrested after authorities tried to disband a brawl outside William Allen High School . The fighting began with two female students and escalated, garnering a crowd of about 200 people. Slippery Rock: Search for missing fisherman Authorities are searching for a man who went fishing in Moraine State Park and disappeared Thursday night. As of Friday afternoon, the investigation was continuing. NATIONAL Budget bill goes to Obama The Senate and the House have both approved a two-year bill that would allow the government to continue borrowing money to pay its debts. The deal, which would last through March 2017, will now go to President Obama. Fire erupts in Virginia chemistry class At least six people were injured in a chemical fire at W.T. Woodson High School in Fairfax County. Students evacuated the building and, as of Friday afternoon, authorities were investigating the cause of the fire. Gang video leaked A surveillance video documenting a shootout between two motorcycle gangs in Waco, Texas, in May has surfaced. The shootout left nine people dead. CNN reported that the Waco Police Department had released the video, but the department denied it. WORLD Special Ops to be posted in Syria The Obama administration will deploy fewer than 50 American troops to aid those fighting against the Islamic State in Syria. It has already sent Special Operations forces on secret missions in Syria and Iraq. Gitmo detainee returns to London Shaker Aamer , who was jailed at Guantanamo Bay for 14 years without trial, returned to his home in London. He reunited with his wife and four children, the youngest of whom was born after he was detained. IN OTHER NEWS Crisis averted An asteroid will whiz by earth at 1 p.m. on Halloween, coming within about 300,000 miles of the planet. This is close by celestial standards, so astronomers will be able to capture the asteroid’s dimensions for research. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI