Posted in COVID-19 Here is the list of Southwestern PA nursing homes reporting COVID-19 cases, deaths by Public Source May 19, 2020 July 14, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Graphic by Natasha Vicens/PublicSource) The Pennsylvania Department of Health on May 19 released COVID-19 data for individual long-term care facilities, including the number of residents and staff infected and the number of deaths per facility. Health Secretary Dr. Rachel Levine said the data will be updated daily. Nursing home facilities in Pennsylvania continue to bear the brunt of the deaths, with residents representing 68% of all COVID-related fatalities in the state. Roughly 7,224, or 5.5% of all infections, are among healthcare workers, as of July 14. After the database was released some nursing homes across the state complained about the discrepancies in the data. The state health department said on Wednesday that it is correcting glitches in the database and is looking to address errors reported by The Philadelphia Inquirer . Here is the breakdown of the COVID-19 cases and deaths in the 10-county region of Southwestern Pennsylvania the state released (you can sort the list by clicking on the headers). The data has been updated July 14, 2020. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI