Posted in Inside our Newsroom Over 300 readers supported PublicSource’s nonprofit journalism in our end-of-year fundraising campaign We met our goal — because of readers like you. by Alyia Paulding January 9, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource is delighted to share that our NewsMatch 2024 campaign was a success. We exceeded our $50,000 goal, and with the generous contributions of the Wyncote Foundation, the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, the Knight Foundation and our local match pool donors, the campaign will bring in over $124,000. Every gift made will power our stories in the year to come, helping us to hold power to account, uplift community voices and meet our region’s information needs. Our impactful journalism is only possible because of the people who support it. Each of the 300+ stories we published in 2024 was powered by our readers and our community, and we are deeply grateful for the opportunity to keep providing this important service for our region. As 2025 takes shape, we’ll be there to provide in-depth information that our region needs — including the topics readers told us they want us to focus on. Although our content is presented without paywalls, it takes considerable resources to produce , and we count on our readers to help us sustain it. We appreciate each and every donation, and we’re already hard at work on new stories. On behalf of our entire team, thank you for supp orting our newsroom . We truly couldn’t do this work without you. Donate now Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , leadstorynoshow , Pennsylvania , Pittsburgh Alyia Paulding alyia@publicsource.org Alyia (they/she) is the Director of Membership and Development at PublicSource, working to establish and nurture relationships with donors and funders. Before joining PublicSource in 2020, Alyia worked... More by Alyia Paulding