Posted in Inside our Newsroom How PublicSource’s reader-supported journalism has led to change in our region by Jennie Ewing Liska and Halle Stockton December 19, 2024 December 21, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X From scrutiny on a new juvenile detention contractor to improved access to halal food for Afghan refugees at a local food pantry, PublicSource’s journalism has made its mark on and with the Pittsburgh region over the last year. We’re proud to share PublicSource’s third annual impact report. In this report, you’ll find examples of changes in individuals, organizations, places, communities and systems that came from our reporting. Whether an impact involved one person or many, it is humbling to hear about them and also a reminder of why we do this work — because we care about our region. While this is only our third report, our journalism has been catalyzing change since 2011, and we’ve been tracking it for more than six years. Over this time, our thinking around journalistic impact has been evolving and growing. We know local journalism is a powerful source of information to help residents of the Pittsburgh region improve their communities and their lives. But how exactly does that happen? At PublicSource, we believe that information deepens understanding. Understanding evokes empathy. And empathy strengthens communities and leads to a power structure that is responsive and accountable to the people. We track impact to understand where communities are strengthening because of information and where we have opportunity to do a better job of putting information into the hands of people who can use it. This year, our impact report lives alongside the new PublicSource 2025-28 strategic plan, which focuses on enhancing our ability to equip and empower our neighbors through reach, partnerships and our incredible team here at PublicSource. (More on that to come in 2025.) We hope you will work with us in support of our vision for the future by making a gift of support and sharing with us when a PublicSource story creates impact for you. Co-Executive Directors Jennie Liska & Halle Stockton Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: impact , journalism , Pittsburgh Jennie Ewing Liska jennie@publicsource.org Jennie is co-executive director of revenue and operations. She oversees revenue generation and relationship development to support the growth of Public Source and manages internal business operations.... More by Jennie Ewing Liska Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton