Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts Social media study says gender affects approach to cancer care by PublicSource contributor September 22, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Social networking Social media study says gender affects approach to cancer care A study based on social media posts has found that men and women with certain gender-specific types of cancer approach and react to treatment differently. Both men and women did their research, but women proved to be more skeptical of it while men based their decisions on it. The Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York commissioned the study for which thousands of cancer-related Internet posts from leading forums were analyzed for insight on the decision-making process of men and women, according to a Wall Street Journal report . The analysis pulled 70,000 posts from online forums between 2012 and 2014 relating to prostate cancer in men. The research was narrowed down to 633 posts that dealt specifically with how the men decided on treatment. The Journal reported its conclusion: Men with prostate cancer were generally found to be analytical, methodical and data-driven in assessing their options. They sought out the latest scientific studies and outcomes research, and tended to obtain several doctors’ opinions. For women, breast cancer was the focus. Analysts identified 642,052 posts from cancer forums like Breastcancer.org between 2012 and 2014, and after review, narrowed that number down to 806 posts. By contrast, women with breast cancer were typically distrustful of scientific data and even of their own physicians. Anxious that their cancer might return—and viewing any risk of recurrence, however small, as too great—many women favored aggressive treatment such as double mastectomy. According to the study, gender differences in the approach to treatment for prostate and breast cancer were clear, but other diseases may not exhibit differences. Ido Hadari, a chief executive officer at the health-care data analytics firm Treato, told the Journal he believes that these two cancers reflect results because they show the loss of sexual identity. Dr. Suzanne Miller from the Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia says there could be a bias when it comes to breast-cancer patients online. Miller, a psychologist and professor, said women who “vent online tend to be more anxious about their cancers.” According to the article, Sloan-Kettering acknowledged that the study, directed by its marketing team, is not traditional research. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The company is “hoping the analysis will help it grapple with the growing role social media and online support groups play in guiding people on how to make decisions on cancer care.” Reach Christine Manganas at cmanganas@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Internet , Technology