Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Listen to what some Pennsylvanians think the next president should do about mass shootings by Courtney Linder and Iain Oldman June 14, 2016 November 19, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Hillary Clinton, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, visited Pittsburgh Tuesday, just two days after the deadliest mass shooting in U.S. history. (Read our coverage of her visit). PublicSource asked several members of the crowd — who were nearly all Hillary supporters — the same question: In the wake of the Orlando tragedy, what do you think the next president should do to address mass shootings? Listen to their answers below. Erin Gorman, first-grade teacher, Meadville, Pa. Jason Martin, retired school teacher, Pittsburgh Maria Mangano, 31, artist, South Side Slopes, Pittsburgh Anthony Sams, 69, retired machinist, Hazelwood, Pittsburgh Tom Barchfeld, retired, Pittsburgh Mary Lou Benedetti (left, speaking), University of Pittsburgh administrator, Allegheny County, and friend Tori Burch Miles Newell, Aliquippa, Pa. Robert Speshock (right), retired, Venetia, Pa. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI