Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts Bill Clinton received $16 million in taxpayer funds since he left office by Eric Holmberg March 12, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Former President Bill Clinton Former President Bill Clinton has collected $16 million from taxpayers since leaving office in 2001, according to Politico . From 2000 to 2014, Clinton collected more than any other modern president, beginning with Gerald R. Ford, even when adjusting for inflation. The Former Presidents Act allows former presidents money for staff, office space and for pension and health costs, among other things. The act was passed in 1958 to “maintain the dignity” of the presidency by subsidizing the correspondence of former commanders in chief and keeping them from falling on hard times, like those faced by Harry S Truman. After leaving office in 1953, Truman acknowledged that he was living largely off proceeds from the sale of his father’s farm. Truman took a very different view of how a president should monetize the fame of being in office. He said : “I could never lend myself to any transaction, however respectable, that would commercialize on the prestige and dignity of the office of the presidency.” The money is administered by the U.S. General Services Administration , which helps manage the basic administrative and purchasing decisions for other federal agencies. But, while Bill Clinton has collected more money than other former presidents, he also has the highest net worth, at $38 million, of the four most recent past presidents, according to one 2012 estimate by ABC News. With more politicians entering politics as millionaires — more than half of the members of Congress in 2014 were millionaires — it seems unlikely that another former president will struggle financially as Truman did. From another Politico story : The speaking circuit was especially good to Bill Clinton, who earned nearly $52 million from it, including millions in foreign income. And the two books each [Bill and Hillary Clinton] penned yielded more than $40 million, including an eye-popping $15 million advance paid to Bill Clinton for his 2004 autobiography, “My Life.” That’s $3 million more than what had been previously reported – which at the time was believed to be the largest book advance ever. Hillary Clinton’s two books – the autobiography “Living History” and “It Takes a Village” – yielded $10.5 million. You can read more about the Former Presidents Act in this 2014 report from the Congressional Research Service, the nonpartisan research arm of Congress. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @holmberges . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI