Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts ‘Our children’s children will be staggered by our idiocy’ by Natasha Khan March 18, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Guardian’s Alan Rusbridger is choosing one story as his last hurrah after two decades in charge of the paper: Climate change. “Our children’s children will be staggered at our idiocy,” Rusbridger said in a podcast about the project. Before he leaves as editor-in-chief of the British national daily newspaper this summer, Rusbridger has embarked on a major series devoted to telling stories in “different ways” about the climate crisis. “It’s clearly the most important story that we could be thinking about,” he said in the podcast. “And yet, you scan the daily newspapers and it’s nearly absent.” Rusbridger says journalists struggle to tell stories on the issue because changes to the earth’s climate may be “happening too fast for human comfort, but they happen too slowly for the newsmakers — and, to be fair, for most readers.” And, Rusbridger said, climate change presents many things that may happen but have yet to occur, which doesn’t traditionally work for the media. But “these events that have yet to materialise may dwarf anything journalists have had to cover over the past troubled century,” he wrote in an editorial about the project. “There may be untold catastrophes, famines, floods, droughts, wars, migrations and sufferings just around the corner. But that is futurology, not news, so it is not going to force itself on any front page any time soon.” A Guardian project asks this : “Is there a new way to make the world care?” A podcast series from the Guardian will provide a behind-the-scenes look at Rusbridger and his team of journalists as they attempt to find a new narrative on the issue. In the first episode, he said the project is personal. He decided to embark on it this past Christmas when he was thinking about whether he’d have any regrets when he left his post. “Very few regrets, I thought, except this one: that we had not done justice to this huge, overshadowing, overwhelming issue of how climate change will probably, within the lifetime of our children, cause untold havoc and stress to our species,” he said in an article about the project. Here’s the first episode: FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org or 412-315-0261. Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan