Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts Secretive groups spending millions on ads in Kansas by Eric Holmberg October 10, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Kansas Gov. Sam Brownback Two nonprofits that don’t disclose their donors are doing most of the advertising in the Kansas state governor’s race. On one side is the Alliance for Freedom, which is backing Republican Gov. Sam Brownback, and on the other side is the Kansas Values Initiative, which has run attack ads against Brownback. According to the story by The Center for Public Integrity : Four years ago, the last time Brownback ran, no such groups purchased ads in the governor’s race in Kansas, and only $713,000 was spent on TV ads overall. This cycle, non-disclosing groups paid $3.3 million of the $6.3 million spent on ads run in the state so far. And Kansans have seen more ads for state-level elections produced by these secretive groups than voters in any other state. This is in stark contrast to Pennsylvania where Gov. Tom Corbett and challenger Tom Wolf have bought most of their own TV ads. All of this outside spending in Kansas was made possible by the 2010 Supreme Court decision on the Citizens United case, which allows outside groups to spend unlimited amounts of money on politics as long as that spending is not being coordinated with a candidate. This election cycle, more than 65 percent of the ads by such [secretive] groups have been negative attacks on candidates for the top-of-the-ticket gubernatorial races [nationwide]. Since some of these secretive groups are brand new and may only exist for a short period of time, it is hard for regulators to keep track of them. Sometimes the groups can set up shop, air ads during an election then dissolve as soon as the polls close, without registering with the IRS or state agencies. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Campaign finance