Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 3, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 3, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: City studies ID proposal Pittsburgh is exploring a proposal for ID cards for city residents. The cards, which would be less expensive than the $28.50 state-issued IDs, could supplement school district and workplace IDs, driver’s licenses, library cards and Connect Cards. They could also make it easier for them to have access to social and cultural services. Pittsburgh: Program seeks to raise employment The Three Rivers Workforce Investment Board announced the Platform to Employment program Thursday. P2E will provide work training, behavioral health services and financial counseling for people who have been unemployed for at least 27 weeks. Harrisburg: Kane says judge violated ethics rules Attorney General Kathleen Kane alleged Friday that State Supreme Court Justice J. Michael Eakin sent “racial, misogynistic” emails using state computers. Eakin had not commented on the allegation to several news outlets. Kane had appeared at a hearing for a second perjury charge. Harrisburg: Budget impasse harming schools, auditor general says Seventeen school districts and two intermediate units have borrowed more than $364 million while the state goes without a budget, Auditor General Eugene DePasquale said. He added the stalemate is forcing schools to focus on financial insecurity rather than education. West Chester: University bookstore apologizes for selling date dolls The bookstore at West Chester University apologized for selling 6-inch inflatable dolls and removed them from the store. The packaging said they were self-inflatable, but then said you had to punch the $7.99 dolls to blow them up. Female students protested the sale of the dolls. NATIONAL Job growth dips August and September saw the smallest two-month unemployment decrease in more than a year, the Labor Department reported. The job market needs 100,000 new jobs each month to match population growth. Oregon college student recognized as hero Chris Mintz , an Army veteran and student at Umpqua Community College, blocked a door against Chris Harper-Mercer during his shooting rampage Thursday. Mintz, who was shot by the gunman, was hospitalized, but is expected to survive. Ten, including the gunman, were killed. 3 dead, 1 injured in Florida shooting A gunman killed three people before killing himself outside Inglis Town Hall in Northwestern Florida. As of Friday afternoon, officers were still investigating. Education secretary to resign in December Arne Duncan , a member of President Obama’s original cabinet, will step down at the end of the year. Deputy Secretary of Education John B. King, Jr., will succeed him. WORLD Afghanistan plane crash under investigation Six crewmen, five civilian contractors and three Afghan citizens were killed after a C-130J plane crashed in Jalalabad Friday. Taliban forces claim to have shot the plane, but authorities are still investigating. IN OTHER NEWS Prehistoric leftovers A farmer and his friend uncovered the bones of a woolly mammoth while they were digging in a soy field in Southeastern Michigan. The mammoth was probably 40 years old when it was butchered by early humans 10,000 to 15,000 years ago, a University of Michigan professor said. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI