Posted in Investigations , PUBLIC SAFETY Breaking down Trapp-Axon ties over time by Matt Stroud September 25, 2017 February 15, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pittsburgh Bureau of Police Commander Clarence “Ed” Trapp was assigned to develop the city’s body camera program in 2012. Chief Nate Harper introduced Trapp to two salespeople from Taser International, later renamed as Axon. Within five years, Trapp’s ties to the company grew closer, including several all-expenses-paid trips and paid consulting work. This timeline details those ties through documents, email correspondence and important dates. Trapp was instrumental in closing a $1.5 million deal for 550 body cameras between the City of Pittsburgh and Axon earlier this year. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Matt Stroud _migrated-163-matt-stroud@example.com Matt Stroud is a freelance writer who specializes in criminal justice. He has written for Pittsburgh City Paper, The Atlantic, Reuters and other publications. More by Matt Stroud