Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts Veterans seeking health care still tangled up in shoddy system by Halle Stockton July 6, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Reliable and timely medical treatment for the nation’s veterans remains elusive even as they are referred away from the Department of Veterans Affairs to private doctors. According to The Arizona Republic , federal inspectors found that the delays in treatment and excessive costs that have become synonymous with the VA are also proving to be an issue when veterans seek private medical treatment. The new report adds to a 15-month crisis of leadership and operations at the VA caused by revelations of delayed and inappropriate medical services, mismanagement, financial problems and other problems. VA Secretary Eric Shinseki resigned amid controversy last year and interim Inspector General Richard Griffin retired under pressure this week. The VA created the Patient-Centered Community Care program to prevent veterans from falling through the cracks caused by the bureaucracy. The program, called PC3, set up an infrastructure to get veterans private treatment when their local VA was overbooked or could not provide the necessary service. But the problems persist in PC3: VA contractors set up appointments for patients without first checking to see if the patient would actually be able to make it. That led to more than 40 percent of authorized doctor visits not ever happening, according to the story. Patients haven’t been getting appointments quickly enough, according to program requirements. The VA was not providing patients with the proper authorizations by the time they needed it for appointments with outside doctors. There is a shortage of doctors within the two companies that the VA contracted with for a yearly cost of $9.5 billion. [One of those contracted companies] TriWest, which serves veterans in Arizona, said in a prepared statement, “Many of the challenges noted within the report occurred within the infancy of the program and have been refined over the past year.” Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or at hstockton@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @HalleStockton . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Veterans affairs Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton