Posted in Daily report , posts July 8, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 8, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Earning a profit The city is on track to end the year with a surplus of up to $5 million, likely because real estate and income taxes were raised 0.5 mills. Pittsburgh: Uber fares drop In an effort to spike demand, Uber lowered the price of service 15 percent on Tuesday. Drivers were not given advance warning and are concerned that the diminished prices won’t create more earnings. Pittsburgh: Sick pay New legislation by the Pittsburgh City Council aims to make paid sick leave mandatory. The number of cities that have passed similar laws is growing, and they include Philadelphia, Seattle and San Francisco. Allentown: Mayor suspends bid for U.S. Senate Allentown Mayor Ed Pawlowski withdrew from the race after FBI agents searched City Hall as part of a grand jury investigation. Philadelphia: Foundations donate money to literacy push The William Penn and Lenfest foundations donated a combined $10.5 million to Philadelphia School District’s $30 million literacy initiative . The money will go toward teacher training, literacy coaches and in-class libraries. Statewide: Turnpike tolls increase All tolls will go up by 6 percent starting Jan. 3, 2016. The tolls are used to pay funding requirements and to improve the Turnpike. Tolls are expected to increase yearly. NATIONAL Obama turns to Vietnam Seeking to forge a partnership against China, President Obama welcomed the Communist Party leader Nguyen Phu Trong to the Oval Office on Tuesday to discuss an economic and militaristic alliance . Vietnam is among the nations in the Pacific Rim trade pact. New CDC report on heroin use The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released a report Tuesday, showing that the heroin epidemic is fueled by new users : women and white Americans between 18 and 25, most of whom make the transition to heroin because of opioid painkillers. U.S. and Britain denied communication access The governments are seeking exceptional access to encrypted communications, but an elite panel of code breakers denounced their plans in a report, citing that giving the governments backdoor keys only invites more malicious hacking. IN OTHER NEWS Millions of mummies In the Saqqara site in Cairo, Egypt, archeologists dug up catacombs full of mummies, but not the human kind — they found eight million mummified animals, mostly dogs, who were bred for sacrifice to Anubis. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.