Posted in Daily report , posts May 15, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 15, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Philadelphia: Eighth body found, all passengers accounted for An eighth victim was discovered in the wreckage of Amtrak train 188 on Thursday. Officials have now accounted for all of the train’s 243 passengers. Forty-three passengers remain hospitalized and six of those are in critical condition. Philadelphia: Six officers acquitted A squad of narcotics officers faced charges of corruption , but all were acquitted by a federal jury. Allentown: Homicide hearing goes to full trial Fourteen-year-old Jamie Silvonek and 21-year-old Caleb Barnes are charged with criminal homicide, abuse of a corpse, tampering with evidence and criminal conspiracy in connection to the death of Cheryl Silvonek, Jamie Silvonek’s mother. Harrisburg: No charges against state police commissioner In March, retired trooper Anthony DeLuca put up signs criticizing Acting State Police Commissioner Marcus Brown near Brown’s home. Brown removed the signs but will not be charged. DeLuca did not have approval to plant the signs in the first place, according to the Cumberland County District Attorney. Pittsburgh: Empty freight train derails in Hazelwood On Thursday morning, more than 10 hopper cars derailed in Hazelwood. The train cars were empty and there were no injuries. NATIONAL Azerbaijan secretly funds trip for 10 members of Congress The Office of Congressional Ethics reported that 10 members of Congress took an all-expenses paid trip to a conference in Baku. The State Oil Company of the Azerbaijan Republic sent $750,000 through nonprofit corporations in the U.S. to conceal the source of the funds. Avian flu leads to state of emergency in Iowa Avian flu is killing hens at an alarming rate in Iowa, Minnesota, Wisconsin and other major egg-producing states. Over 40 percent of Iowa’s egg laying hens are dead or dying. A national shortage of eggs and egg products should be expected. California wildfires and climate change In an unfortunate catch-22, forest fires brought on by climate change introduce vast amounts of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. IN OTHER NEWS Scientists uncover first warm-blooded fish The opah is a deepwater predator and it’s the very first warm-blooded fish ever discovered, which changes everything we thought we knew about science. Video game universe with 18 quintillion planets Hello Games is developing “No Man’s Sky,” a procedurally-generated video game set in a universe so large it would take a player five billion years to explore. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI