Posted in Election 2024 After the ads, rallies and voting, what are your thoughts on the historic 2024 election? Pennsylvania has been at the center of the high-anxiety race between Kamala Harris and Donald Trump. With the news on Wednesday morning that Trump has clinched the 47th U.S. presidency, we want to hear Southwestern Pennsylvania’s thoughts on our collective future. by Stephanie Mirah November 6, 2024 November 6, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A person sleeps while waiting to hear Republican presidential nominee former President Donald Trump speak at PPG Paints Arena, Monday, Nov. 4, 2024, in Uptown. The rally concluded around 9:30 p.m. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Democracy & Doubt Pittsburgh navigates trust and choice in the 2024 election season The nation and region voted Tuesday in an election as contentious as any in memory. As the dust settles following Donald Trump’s victory, tell us how you’re feeling about the future of the country, state or region. We intend to publish responses, plus any identifying information you choose to provide (but not email addresses) and reserve the right to edit for grammar, clarity or legal considerations. Tell us, in 50 words or less, how you’re feeling about the future of the country, state or region. (Required) Are there election-related questions on your mind that you’d like our staff to try to answer in upcoming reporting? (We won’t publish these verbatim, but may seek ways to report the answers.) Please provide an email address, which we won’t publish, so that we can follow up with any questions. Name (Optional, and if provided we will include with any comments we publish) Profession, if applicable (Optional) Age (Optional) Your location, neighborhood or municipality (Optional) Δ More Election 2024 coverage As Trump takes office on MLK Day, ‘we did it’ meets ‘we must fight back’ From Shaler to East Liberty to Oakland to Downtown, Pittsburghers took stock of a civil rights holiday, a pugnacious inauguration and the road ahead. You survived 2024. Now vote one more time — for your must-follow news topics. While the election grabbed attention, Pittsburgh, Allegheny County and the Southwestern Pennsylvania region also saw big changes in government spending, housing, energy, the environment, education and health. Democrats retain 1-seat majority control of the Pennsylvania House Darkness or dawn? Pittsburgh responds to triumph of Trump, GOP PublicSource asked readers to share their thoughts and feelings about the future following the Nov. 5 general election, which saw Republican Donald Trump defeat Democrat Kamala Harris. MORE STORIES Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , audience callout , Donald Trump , election , election 2024 , Kamala Harris , Pennsylvania , Pittsburgh Stephanie Mirah stephaniemirah@publicsource.org Stephanie Mirah is the audience growth and engagement producer for PublicSource. In her role, she will continue to cultivate relationships with current PublicSource readers and subscribers while seeking... More by Stephanie Mirah