Posted in Equity Pittsburgh marks another day of peaceful mass anti-racism rallies across the city Two county council members say they’ll introduce an ordinance to ban tear gas and rubber bullets. by Public Source June 6, 2020 June 6, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Black Lives Matter protesters at Bakery Square in Pittsburgh during a sit-in demonstration on June 6, 2020. (Photo by Nick Childers/PublicSource) The nation saw another Saturday marked by rallies decrying police brutality and racism, and Pittsburgh was no exception. A large crowd gathered in Bakery Square Saturday afternoon for a Black Lives Matter sit-in on this eighth day of protest. Pittsburgh police were present and, as the crowd that grew up to 1,000 people moved down Penn Avenue toward the intersection of Centre and Negley avenues at about 5:30 p.m., officers moved ahead of them to clear streets. The intersection of Centre and Negley is a scene of controversy after a confrontation on Monday, June 1, between police and a crowd of people. There were several reports by those in attendance that stated that police used tear gas and rubber bullets, and injuries and side effects they experienced appeared to match the accounts. However, that evening, Mayor Bill Peduto and Pittsburgh Police Commander Jason Lando said police had used “smoke, not gas.” Peduto has since stated that he had based his comments off of inaccurate police reports. What happened at the East Liberty intersection that evening is now the subject of two Peduto-prompted investigations by the Office of Municipal Investigations and the Citizen Police Review Board — along with the ACLU, NAACP and U.S. Attorney’s Office. Also on Saturday, Allegheny County Council member Bethany Hallam announced on Twitter that she and fellow council member Olivia Bennett would propose at Tuesday’s council meeting an ordinance to ban the use of tear gas, rubber bullets, flash bang grenades and bean bag rounds in the county. The ordinance, as proposed, states that although these tactics are deemed less lethal than traditional firearms, they can cause death or permanent injury or aggravate pre-existing conditions, like asthma. Below are some of the scenes from Saturday’s demonstration in Pittsburgh: Protesters at a sit-in in Bakery Square in Pittsburgh for Civil Saturdays on June 6. 2020. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Black Lives Matter protesters at Bakery Square in Pittsburgh during a sit-in demonstration on June 6, 2020. (Photo by Nick Childers/PublicSource) People who attended a June 6 sit-in at Bakery Square in Pittsburgh chalk names of those killed by police violence. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) People who attended a June 6 sit-in at Bakery Square in Pittsburgh chalk names of those killed by police violence. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Bakery Square in Pittsburgh during a sit-in demonstration on June 6, 2020. (Photo by Nick Childers/PublicSource) Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting A person drumming at a protest near Bakery Square on Saturday. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Citizens holding signs while marching in a protest near Bakery Square on June 6, 2020.(Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) A woman honks her horn and raises her fist in support of people marching in a protest near Bakery Square on June 6, 2020 (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) A person at a June 6 protest with the names of people killed by police violence written on an American flag. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) (Photo by Nick Childers/PublicSource) A crowd of up to 1,000 people marched to the intersection of Centre and Negley avenues and sat in protest of racism and police brutality on Saturday, June, 6, 2020. (Photo by Alexis Lai) Continuing coverage of civil unrest, anti-racism and policing in Pittsburgh (latest at top): As Black Lives Matter marches go on, Pittsburgh launches a task force to find “people intent on causing destruction” Gov. Wolf, Mayor Peduto call for police reform on the sixth day of Black Lives Matter protests in Pittsburgh When we do nothing in the face of racism and brutality, we represent Amy Cooper and Derek Chauvin. We are complicit. Police deployed tear gas, rubber bullets in East Liberty against protesters of Black Lives Matter march; 20 arrested Our cities are burning, and so is the mental health of this African-American teen Governor addresses weekend protests across the state Pittsburgh is under curfew order after peaceful protests over George Floyd’s killing ‘get hijacked’ and turn violent Reach PublicSource managing editor Halle Stockton at halle@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: policing , protests , racism