Posted in Trump Impacts Are Trump’s tariffs changing how you shop, work, invest, plan? Trump’s tariffs have roiled markets and complicated our consumerism. Have they prompted you to do anything differently? If so, we’d like to share your responses with the Pittsburgh region. by Rich Lord April 9, 2025 April 9, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Election night watch party, Wednesday, Nov. 6, 2024, at the Fairmont Pittsburgh in Downtown.  (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) President Donald Trump’s second administration has featured an ever-changing (mostly expanding) array of threatened tariffs on imported goods. The shifting news has sent stock prices on a wild (mostly downward) ride and created uncertainty for businesses and consumers. Share your tariff story by filling out our form The disruption of global trade has spurred a bumper crop of advice on everything from managing personal investments to buying imported goods . But what, if anything, are you doing differently? If you, your household, your business or your favorite organization are taking measures in response to tariffs, or the related economic uncertainty, we’d like to know about it and potentially share it with our audience. Share your tariff tactics below, let us know who you are for verification, and we may publish yours alongside others. Name Age Your location, neighborhood or municipality How would you describe the role you play in which you’re responding to tariffs? For instance, are you providing for a family, organizing a club, running a business? What are you doing differently because of tariffs? Email (It’d be great to be able to contact you, but sharing your email is optional.) Δ Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord