Posted in GENDER & IDENTITY Pittsburgh’s Indigenous legacy is alive and thriving Discover Native American culture in the Western Pennsylvania region through events, art and historical education. by Aakanksha Agarwal November 20, 2024 September 24, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Members of federally recognized Native American tribes showcase daily life skills to attendees at the American Indian Heritage Weekend, an annual program at the Meadowcroft Rockshelter and Historic Village in Avella. (Photo courtesy of Heinz History Center) This story was originally published by NEXTpittsburgh , a news partner of PublicSource. NEXTpittsburgh features the people, projects and places advancing the region and the innovative and cool things happening here. Sign up to get their free newsletter. Long before Pittsburgh became the steel city, it was home to thriving Indigenous communities living along the rivers and in the forests of this region. Though much has changed over the centuries, their legacy is still alive. This Native Heritage Month, Krisa Spangler, a Mohawk tribal member and a team member at the Council of Three Rivers American Indian Center [COTRAIC] in Dorseyville, is sharing how Pittsburgh’s Indigenous culture has not only survived, but continues to evolve and stay vibrant today. Understanding Western Pennsylvania’s Indigenous legacy Western Pennsylvania holds a profound Indigenous legacy. Many tribes, including the Erie, Shawnee and Monongahela, once called this region home. According to Spangler, “Pennsylvania was home to several tribes over time — each with unique histories, customs and sacred ties to this land.” Over time, however, European colonization, forced displacement and changing political landscapes pushed many of these groups from their ancestral territories. The construction of Fort Pitt in the mid-1700s marked a significant and often painful era of change for Native populations in the region . “With settlers arriving, tribes adapted however they could, shifting hunting grounds and even relocating entirely,” said Spangler. “And yet, many fought to maintain their presence here. It was about survival.” Despite this history, many people are unaware of the enduring impact Indigenous communities have left on the region. This legacy is preserved through stories, cultural practices and spiritual reverence for natural landmarks — especially Western Pennsylvania’s rivers. “Water is life,” Spangler said. “Every waterway, every river, has meaning to Indigenous people. Water is sacred.” A young dancer gets ready at the Seneca Nation Pow Wow in 2012. (Photo courtesy of Heinz History Center) Bringing Indigenous culture to life at COTRAIC COTRAIC plays a central role in maintaining Indigenous culture and fostering understanding within the broader Pittsburgh community. Although Pennsylvania doesn’t have reservations , COTRAIC provides a space for Native families in and around Pittsburgh to reconnect with their heritage. As Spangler explains, “Community days are a time for Native families to come together, sharing and teaching traditions. Each day we might focus on crafts, dance or other aspects of our heritage. These gatherings keep our culture alive.” The center’s annual Pow Wow , now in its 45th year, is a particularly cherished event, attracting attendees from as far as Wisconsin, Canada and New York. This two-day celebration held in September is open to the public and includes Native dance competitions, craft vendors and traditional food — offering Pittsburgh residents a rare, immersive glimpse into Indigenous life. It is a powerful way for Native Americans to connect across generations. Challenges and opportunities in public education Educating non-Native communities about Indigenous culture and history can be challenging because Native Americans are often seen as historical figures rather than contemporary communities. COTRAIC addresses these gaps with a Speakers Bureau , sending Native representatives to schools, libraries and even workplaces. Presentations cover topics from dance to Indigenous values, offering audiences the chance to engage directly with Native American perspectives. “We’ve been invited everywhere — from daycares to the FBI building. Our goal is to share our culture widely and dispel myths.” One of the challenges Indigenous youth face is acceptance within schools. For Native boys, wearing long hair is traditional and symbolic, yet it can often lead to bullying. COTRAIC’s educational efforts address this, fostering understanding and respect. “It’s not just about educating kids on culture,” said Spangler. “It’s about teaching love and acceptance. These issues are real for our families.” Native culture is not static — it’s a living, evolving part of everyday life for Pittsburgh’s “urban Natives.” “We are alive,” said Spangler. “We are still here. While we’re more secluded in Pennsylvania, away from larger ceremonies, that doesn’t mean they don’t happen. Some take place with what we have, and those that can’t happen here, many Native American families travel to where their tribes hold them.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Spangler encourages non-Native Pittsburghers to engage thoughtfully and respectfully with Indigenous communities. Support can mean showing up to events, learning their history or even talking to our children about Native American culture. To continue honoring and learning about Indigenous heritage, here are some local resources and exhibits around the Western Pennsylvania region that offer deeper insights into the our area’s Native history and culture: Meadowcroft Rockshelter and Historic Village 401 Meadowcroft Rd., Avella, Pa. Journey into the past at Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Avella, Pa .,  North America’s oldest evidence of human habitation, dating back 19,000 years. Discover how the rock overhang sheltered prehistoric peoples and experience the traditions of the Eastern Woodland Indians in a 16th-century re-created village, where you can learn about native customs, tools and survival skills. Beyond ancient history, visit a reconstructed 19th-century village that brings to life the charm of rural Pennsylvania from 150 years ago. Meadowcroft celebrates the rich heritage of Indigenous and early settlers through interactive exhibits and seasonal tours. Carnegie Library’s Native American Book Collection All locations Get started with Native American literature by exploring a diverse selection of books and audiobooks by Indigenous authors at the Carnegie Library. Staff recommendations include Lora Chilton’s “1666,” a historical novel about survival and resilience, and Brandon Reid’s coming-of-age story “Beautiful Beautiful.” Visitors learn about Native tribes who once dwelled in Western Pa. as part of the Fort Pitt Museum’s Homelands: Native Nations of Allegheny exhibition. (Photo courtesy of Fort Pitt Museum) Fort Pitt Museum’s ‘Homelands: Native Nations of Allegheny’ exhibit (On view through June 2025) Point State Park, 601 Commonwealth Place, Downtown Dive into Western Pennsylvania’s Native American history at the Homelands: Native Nations of Allegheny exhibit at the Fort Pitt Museum . The showcase highlights the Delaware, Seneca and Shawnee tribes with standout pieces like the 14,000-year-old Miller Point — a stone projectile found at Meadowcroft Rockshelter in 1976, the oldest object made by humans in the region. Don’t miss the intricate Seneca-Cayuga boy’s dance outfit, a stunning example of tribal craftsmanship. (Photo courtesy of Carnegie Museum of Natural History) Carnegie Museum of Natural History’s Alcoa Foundation Hall of American Indians 4400 Forbes Ave., Oakland Explore four distinct Native American cultures, from Tlingit to Lakota, at this comprehensive exhibit that showcases nearly 1,000 artifacts, from Hopi Katsina dolls to traditional garments. With hands-on activities like corn grinding and interactive storytelling, the exhibit is great for all ages. Fort Necessity National Battlefield National Pike, Farmington, Pa. This historical site recalls the early clash between British and French forces that set the stage for the French and Indian War in 1754. Walk the grounds where George Washington surrendered for the only time in his career, marking a key moment in the nation’s history intertwined with Native American alliances and territories. Four Winds Gallery 5512 Walnut St., Shadyside Rooted in John and Carol Krena’s 1970s journeys across the American Southwest, Four Winds Gallery has become a destination for Native American art lovers in Pittsburgh. With pieces ranging from Navajo jewelry to intricate Pueblo pottery, their deep connections with Indigenous artists bring an expansive collection of housewares and more. Aakanksha Agarwal is a wine, travel and lifestyle writer from India. Formerly a Bollywood stylist, she now resides in Pittsburgh . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Art , culture , history , Indigineous , native American , Pittsburgh