Posted in Daily report , posts August 12, 2015 by PublicSource contributor August 12, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Homicide detective charged with theft Today, Common Pleas Judge Jeffrey A. Manning is scheduled to announce a verdict for Detective Michael Reddy on a charge that he stole a bank envelope carrying $220 at a local 7-Eleven in 2014. Pittsburgh: Bubble vandals strike again A fountain in Mt. Lebanon was overflowing with the harmless suds on Tuesday morning. This is the second bubble “attack” since July 9 . Pittsburgh: Shot while knitting A 71-year-old woman in the North Side was shot in her left leg while she was knitting in her home on Monday night. Authorities are investigating. Norristown: AG Kane’s driver pleads not guilty Patrick Reese, who is accused of looking through emails in state computers, did not comment after he left court on Tuesday. Meanwhile, retired activist Gene Stilp is devising a plan to get Kane out of office. Harrisburg: Ex-Penn State administrators appeal charges The lawyers of three administrators accused of trying to mask the 2011 Sandusky child sex abuse scandal went to court on Tuesday, claiming the men’s rights to legal representation were violated. The suspects are out on bail, and none of them attended the hearing. Erie County: Study reveals spike in drug-related deaths Forty-three drug-related deaths have been reported in the county. Heroin was involved in 18 of the deaths, and many other cases are still under investigation. NATIONAL Ferguson unrest continues On Tuesday morning, five white men calling themselves the Oath Keepers arrived in Ferguson. Members of the right-wing group were carrying assault weapons and claimed they were trying to keep the peace. Demonstrations on Monday prompted police to arrest 23 people. Trump is “the most fabulous whiner” Presidential hopeful Donald Trump said , “I am a whiner and I keep whining and whining until I win,” in an interview on Tuesday morning. He also said that despite rumors, he’s not considering running as a third-party candidate. Manager replaces black employee for the sake of customer service In Danville, Va., a manager at Lowe’s Home Improvement asked Marcus Bradley to return to the store because the customer that he was serving had asked that the company not send a black man to the home. Bradley, who is black, was then replaced by his white co-worker Alex Brooks. Brooks refused to make the delivery without Bradley. Google introduces Alphabet In order to more effectively manage the business, the tech mammoth Google created a parent company on Tuesday. It’s called Alphabet Inc., and the new CEO will be Google executive Sundar Pichai. IN OTHER NEWS “The universe is slowly dying” During a conference in Honolulu, Hawaii, a team of astronomers claimed that the universe has about half of the energy now than it did two billion years ago. Their study concludes that the universe is dying. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.