Posted in Daily report , posts June 8, 2015 by Halle Stockton June 8, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Controversy over a sign The Allegheny Health Network, Highmark Health’s provider system, is proposing the installation of signs atop Allegheny General Hospital in an attempt to up its name recognition. The signs would be among the largest in the city, likely visible to Highmark competitor UPMC from its headquarters in the city’s tallest building. Pittsburgh: New security head for public schools George Brown Jr. is the new chief of police for Pittsburgh Public Schools . He said he will focus on diversity and training the school guards on how to treat students with special needs. Harrisburg: Votes scheduled to confirm new state leaders The state Senate is expected to hold votes today for four of Gov. Tom Wolf’s nominees today. The nominee for state police commissioner, Marcus Brown, has been heavily scrutinized and his confirmation remains doubtful. Allentown: Community reels from tragedy Two children fell from a fourth-floor window on Friday; a 3-year-old girl died and a 5-year-old girl was in critical condition over the weekend. The conversation has shifted to making windows more secure. Statewide: State employees’ overtime costs Last year, the $227 million paid to state employees for overtime hours was the most the state has paid in about 20 years. Physicians, psychiatrists and prison corrections officers were among the top earners of overtime pay. Statewide: Construction on deficient bridges More than 550 bridges in Pennsylvania will be repaired in the next three years, and construction begins this month. NATIONAL Two inmates escape New York prison Authorities are conducting a manhunt for two convicted murderers who escaped a maximum-security state prison and remained on the loose Sunday evening. The men used power tools to drill through steel walls and then found an underground route that led them beyond the barbed wire. Beau Biden’s funeral ceremony The vice president asked President Obama to deliver the eulogy for his son, shedding light on the intensely personal relationship the nation’s leaders and their families have. Hackers may have gotten information on private citizens, too The stolen personal information of four million current and former federal employees may have also led hackers to sensitive information shared on the people those employees used for background checks. That includes relatives, friends and roommates. Fight for $15 campaign earns a powerful backer Hillary Clinton placed a call to the growing group of fast-food workers and service industry employees who are holding protests to increase the minimum wage to $15. Clinton launched her campaign with the “It’s your time” slogan, and her support here falls in line with the message that she plans to lift up low-income and middle-class families. IN OTHER NEWS History on the race track American Pharoah wins the Triple Crown , the first horse to do so in 37 years. The accomplishment has assuaged concerns that the expectations put on the horses needed to be lowered. The daily report was compiled by Halle Stockton. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at hstockton@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton