Posted in Equity , HEALTH , PUBLIC SAFETY Needle exchange programs and the heroin crisis by Alexandra Kanik December 15, 2015 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Despite public health research that supports needle exchanges, state law continues to say that distributing syringes for drug use is illegal. If you support or oppose a change in law, let your state senator and state representative know. If you want to know more about the Commonwealth’s response to the heroin crisis and increased risk for HIV and hepatitis C, contact the Department of Health and the Department of Drug and Alcohol Programs . If you support or oppose executive action, contact Gov. Tom Wolf . For local changes, contact your city and county government . If you support or oppose federal funding for needle exchanges, contact your senator and representative . For more information on local harm reduction, contact Prevention Point Pittsburgh , Prevention Point Philadelphia , Lancaster Harm Reduction Project or the Harrisburg Harm Reduction Project . Visit the CDC online for federal research on HIV/AIDS , hepatitis C and needle exchanges . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Criminal Justice , Drug abuse and rehabilitation , Resource , Vulnerable populations