Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by PublicSource contributor October 2, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X train Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. New legislation could delay safety deadline The House introduced a bill this week that would extend the Dec. 31, 2015 deadline to implement positive train control (PTC) on all major railroads to Dec. 31, 2018. Railroads that don’t meet the deadline will be suspended from service at the end of the year unless the bill passes. Two trains collide in St. Francis, WI Two Union Pacific trains, one carrying coal and the other rail (steel bars used to form the track), crashed into each other on Sept. 29. One of the rail cars derailed, but it was reported to be empty. Although there weren’t any injuries, the accident left a two-mile stretch of roads and railroad crossings blocked for about 12 hours . The collision is under investigation . Freight train derails in Marshall, VA Nine cars of Norfolk Southern Intermodal train 204-29 derailed around midnight on Sept. 30. No crew members were injured. The train carried consumer goods, and two of its cars were reported to have contained chemicals. Those cars remained on the tracks, according to Fauquier Now . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting U.S. DOT extends grants to firefighters The Department of Transportation announced nearly $6 million in grants that will go toward training firefighters and first responders to deal with crude oil incidents. The International Association of Fire Chiefs, Center for Rural Development and the University of Findlay will receive the grants. Reach Stephanie Roman at sroman@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @ShogunSteph . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy