Posted in Inside our Newsroom Inside our Newsroom: Getting things right for you by Jeffrey Benzing December 23, 2019 January 6, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X At PublicSource, we’re big fans of facts. No matter the issue — affordable housing, education, environmental sustainability — there’s nothing more important to us than giving residents information they can rely on when making crucial decisions. We work hard every day to provide just that, and in the nearly six years I’ve been at PublicSource, I’ve come to see our fact-checking process as both unique and invaluable. It’s something we believe sets us apart, and we hope you’ll help support our commitment to the facts. In plain terms, fact-checking is our process for taking each story apart, line by line, and scrutinizing everything — big and small — before publication. It’s a bit like balancing a checkbook. Each sentence is entered into a spreadsheet, and then the reporter lists every fact and context needed to support its accuracy. After that, an independent fact-checker combs through to ensure that each and every line is verifiable. If not, the story isn’t ready for you to read. It can be time-consuming and frustrating, but always worthwhile. Help bring quality journalism to the Pittsburgh region. Unfortunately, fact-checking is all too rare, a casualty of shrinking newsrooms and breakneck news/reporting cycles. Before coming to PublicSource in May 2014, I’d written plenty of stories I was proud of (and some less so), but only rarely did I have someone independently vet my reporting. Once I’d been through the PublicSource fact-checking process, I felt a bit of a sinking feeling, thinking about all of the potential errors that might have slipped through before. The fact-checking process always proves its value — whether we find a typo in a name or additional context needed to fully consider the nuance of a complex topic. We’re committed to getting things right for you. Because you’re a PublicSource reader, we know that’s important to you. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI