Posted in Daily report , posts Aug. 15, 2015 by PublicSource contributor August 15, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Allegheny Technologies Inc. locks out union employees Stalled contract negotiations have led ATI to escort union members off of worksites and lock them out. ATI offered a “final” contract to union members, with a deadline of Aug. 10, that went unaccepted. ATI’s union plants will now be operated by salaried employees and temporary staff. Pittsburgh: Consol Energy Center to install metal detectors Consol is replacing wands with 36 walk-through metal detectors . The Sports & Exhibition Authority board will reimburse the Penguins more than $100,000 for the install, which will take place before the 2015-16 kicks off. Butler County: Hunt ends when man surrenders Robert Amend turned himself in at the Allegheny County Jail on Friday morning alongside his attorney. Amend is accused of attempting to kill his estranged girlfriend last Saturday. Other charges include aggravated assault and reckless endangerment of another person. Allentown: Plane crash in Little Lehigh Creek Around 11 a.m. on Friday, a small plane crashed close to the bank of the creek, trapping the pilot inside. Fire officials are trying to prevent the plane’s oil and fuel from leaking into the creek. The pilot was conscious when he was transported to the hospital. Harrisburg: School asks court to revoke liquor license Milton Hershey School filed a petition that claims the restaurant, Ole Barn, is too close to the school to serve alcohol . School officials claim that exposure to intoxicated people would be “detrimental to the students’ health, morals and well-being.” NATIONAL U.S. flag raised in Cuba Secretary of State John Kerry spoke to the Cuban government on Friday on the necessity of improving relations via reciprocal acts of goodwill. The U.S. flag was raised by Marines above the newly-opened Embassy for the first time in 54 years on Friday. OxyContin approved for children The Food and Drug Administration approved the use of OxyContin , an extended release painkiller, for use in children as young as 11 who suffer from cancer, trauma or surgery. Doctors have looked for more painkillers to use in children, but others feel that it could put kids at risk for addiction. Man killed in Cedar Point accident According to police, early on Thursday evening a man was struck and killed by a roller coaster at the Sandusky, Ohio, amusement park . He lost some of his belongings on the ride and jumped into a restricted area to look for them when the car hit him. IN OTHER NEWS ‘Rocky Horror’ turns 40 The 1975 cult classic hit its 40th anniversary this week. It’s probably time to do the “Time Warp” … again. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.