Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan June 19, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been at least six train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Railroad industry files appeal to U.S. DOT crude-by-rail safety rules The Association of American Railroads hopes its appeal will remove a requirement for electronically controlled braking systems and close a “gap in the rule that allows shippers to continue using tank cars not meeting new design specifications,” according to Progressive Railroading. Safety and cost concerns conflict in new oil train rules Environmental groups are suing the federal government because they say the rules aren’t strict enough and leave Americans at risk, while the oil industry, shippers and railroads say safety requirements are unproven and too costly, according to NPR. Senators push for Obama to lift crude oil export ban If the almost 40-year ban on crude oil exports from the U.S. gets lifted, it could mean more crude oil trains on the tracks, according to a U.S. News & World Report story. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor How an oil train fire disrupted a North Dakotan town The Philadelphia Inquirer explores the aftermath of a crude oil train derailment in a small town in North Dakota. New Jersey lawmakers do what they can to improve train safety Admitting that their hands are somewhat tied because crude oil trains are mostly regulated by the federal government, lawmakers in New Jersey approved three measures. One would require railroad companies that transport 200,000 gallons or more of crude oil to submit a “discharge, response and contingency plan” to the state, according to NJ.com. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan