Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Study: Fracking releases “cancer-causing” chemicals into the air way above EPA safety standards by Natasha Khan May 27, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X People living near shale gas operations in densely-fracked parts of Ohio may be getting exposed to dangerous levels of toxic air pollutants many times higher than the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency deems safe. Long-term exposure to these chemicals could raise the risk for developing cancer or respiratory issues. That’s according to a new study from scientists at Oregon State University and the University of Cincinnati, who took air samples in Ohio’s most fracked area, Carroll County, which hosts 480 permitted wells. From I nsideClimate News : Researchers caution they don’t want to create undue alarm with their findings, but they say they hope the results will highlight the urgent need to conduct more in-depth studies of fracking emissions and the potential effects on human health. “What we see here suggests that more needs to be known about the risks people face when exposed,” said study co-leader Erin Haynes, a University of Cincinnati scientist. The study estimates the cancer risk posed by the toxic air emissions measured in Carroll County: For the worst-case scenario — exposure 24 hours a day over 25 years — they found that a person anywhere in the study area would be exposed at a risk level exceeding the threshold the EPA deems acceptable. The study focused on pollutants known as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). These are organic compounds containing carbon and hydrogen, found in fossil fuels. The researchers calculated the lifetime cancer risk in the area, looking at worst-case scenarios, was 2.9 in 10,000, nearly three times the EPA’s acceptable risk level of 1 in 10,000. Scientists took air samples near shale gas operations for three weeks in February 2014. The area is over the Utica Shale, which lies below the Marcellus Shale. Authors of the study stressed that the calculations are worst-case estimations and can’t predict the risk to any individual, according to InsideClimate News. How fracking and other shale gas activities affect public health is still a hotly contested issue. Gov. Tom Wolf has proposed $100,000 in his new budget for a health registry to track illnesses around shale operations, but it’ll have to make it through the state Legislature. Environmental groups have also said it’s not enough money to fund such a registry. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan