Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 10, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 10, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Potential for new park Developer Chuck Betters and the mayor’s office are considering turning Betters’ 600-acre site in Hays into housing and a park. Betters, who would keep mineral rights to the area, may also be interested in gas drilling in the area, but Mayor Peduto says he won’t allow this during his tenure. Pittsburgh: Developer gets buying deadline Continental Real Estate Companies, which is planning to build an apartment complex in North Shore, has until Nov. 30 to buy the land where construction would take place. This would be the parking lot between PNC Park and the Hyatt Place Hotel. Pittsburgh: Airport cuts charge due to drilling profit A $101.2 million budget approved Friday allows for a reduction in what airlines pay to fly out of the Pittsburgh International Airport. The 2016 budget is nearly $3.4 million more than the 2015 one, largely because of revenue from gas drilling on airport property. Harrisburg: Study says gas drilling leads to premature births Pregnant women in the Pennsylvania shale-gas region are 40 percent more likely to have premature births if they’re exposed to natural gas drilling, a Johns Hopkins University study reports. The drilling process might pollute the air or stress the women out, causing pregnancy-related problems. Vandergrift: Steelworkers to lose health care Allegheny Technologies Inc. will nix the healthcare plans of more than 2,000 workers on strike by Nov. 30. The workers, who have been locked out for eight weeks, are protesting unfair labor practices. State College: Wal-Mart evacuated after bomb threat A store in Central Pennsylvania evacuated customers Thursday evening in response to its fourth bomb threat in three weeks. NATIONAL University shootings across the U.S. Police say student Steven Jones killed one student and wounded three others at Northern Arizona University on Friday. Another shooting at Texas Southern University left one dead and another injured. Meanwhile, President Obama visited the families and survivors of last week’s Oregon shooting . Family agrees to shooting settlement The family of Walter Scott accepted a $6.5 million settlement for his death in April. Michael Slager, the ex-police officer who was charged with shooting Scott when he ran unarmed from a routine traffic stop, is in solitary confinement, awaiting trial. SeaWorld orca breeding banned The California Coastal Commission will give SeaWorld San Diego $100 million to expand its orca tanks. But, the commission says the aquarium can no longer breed the whales. No pork for prisoners New regulations are wiping pig products from prison menus and substituting them with “economically viable” turkey bacon. Inmates can still buy pork rinds and bacon from the prison convenience store, but they have to pay for it with their own money. WORLD Pentagon scales back Syria rebel training The Pentagon will start providing weapons support to rebel commanders instead of its current program of training a grassroots rebel army. IN OTHER NEWS Pumpkin problems The dominant canned pumpkin producer Libby’s Pumpkin may run out of their product early because a premature rain season caused the harvest to end a month early. It predicts it’ll have enough product through Thanksgiving. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI