Posted in Election 2020 PHOTOS: Pittsburgh erupts in celebrations over Biden-Harris victory by Public Source November 7, 2020 November 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Jubilant crowds celebrate the news that Joe Biden officially wins the presidency. (Photo by Nick Childers/PublicSource) Hundreds of people marched and danced in the streets of Pittsburgh on Saturday following the news that Pennsylvania had delivered Joe Biden’s victory in the presidential race against President Donald Trump. People danced and sang in the streets of Squirrel Hill with signs and flags. In South Side, people joined the “Every Voice Heard, Every Vote Counted” rally and later marched across the 10th Street Bridge to Downtown. Among them was Michele Feingold, who said she’s “ecstatic” about Biden’s victory. “We worked so hard to bring decency back to this country,” she said. Some people brought their kids to celebrate and mark the historic half of the 2020 winning ticket – Sen. Kamala Harris who made history by becoming the first Black woman and first Asian American to become vice president-elect. Marva Carter, a SEIU 32BJ representative, was holding her two-month-old granddaughter Madge’sti Smith, as she listened to speakers addressing rally-goers Saturday afternoon. Amanda Anstett said she was “very happy” Biden won the presidency, but added that “we have a lot of work to do still.” Below are some of the scenes photojournalists Ryan Loew, Jay Manning and Nick Childers captured on Saturday. Crowds march across the 10 Street Bridge in celebration of Joe Biden’s victory. (Photo by Nick Childers/PublicSource) Crowds march across the 10 Street Bridge in celebration of Joe Biden’s victory. (Photo by Nick Childers/PublicSource) Amanda Anstett, center, standing with a sign in South Side (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) People sing and dance in celebration of the win by president-elect Biden and vice president-elect Harris. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) (Photo by Nick Childers/PublicSource) Rally participants march across 10th Street Bridge towards the City-County Building. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) March participants head from South Side to Downtown. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) (Photo by Nick Childers/PublicSource) Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting People celebrate and dance on the corner of Carson and 10th Street for the “Count On Us” rally and march. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Jacquea Mae, singer and community worker from Homewood, dances down East Carson Street as part of today’s “Every Voice Heard, Every Vote Counted” march. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Jacquea Mae (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Michele Feingold stood along East Carson Street Saturday afternoon. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Jubilant crowds march (Photo by Nick Childers) Rally gathers Downtown (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Monica Ruiz of Casa San Jose speaks at the rally Downtown (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Marva Carter holds her 2-month-old granddaughter. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram