Thousands of people congregated outside of the City-County Building in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. The event joined a handful events across the Pittsburgh region and some 2,000 events and millions of people worldwide to support democracy and oppose the Trump administration’s agenda. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Posted in Trump Impacts Thousands counter Trump’s military parade in No Kings protests in Pittsburgh by Stephanie Strasburg and Quinn Glabicki June 14, 2025 June 25, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Thousands of people showed up in downtown Pittsburgh to take part in the No Kings Day of Defiance protests planned across nearly 2,000 cities and towns globally this weekend. Two protests organized by multiple groups culminated at Pittsburgh’s City County building Saturday afternoon, timed to lead up to a 6 p.m. military parade in Washington, D.C. that coincides with the Army’s 250th anniversary, Flag Day and President Donald Trump’s birthday. Similar protests took place across Western Pennsylvania. Protestors climb the stairs of the City-County Building in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) People react to speakers outside of the City-County Building in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) “People are out in the street because they want to stand with democracy,” said Tracy Colleen Baton, a social worker and director of Indivisible Pittsburgh. “We stand with America and we stand with our neighbors. Trumpism is coming for both of those things.” Our photojournalists @stephstrasburg.bsky.social and @quinnglabicki.bsky.social will be out covering #nokingsprotest today in Downtown Pittsburgh. [image or embed] — Pittsburgh's Public Source ( @publicsource.org ) June 14, 2025 at 1:42 PM The rallies come a day after a person posing as a police officer shot and killed Melissa Hortman , a Democratic state legislator in Minnesota, and her husband in a Minneapolis suburb. Another state Democratic representative was also shot with his wife in a separate incident by the same assailant. A person shows their American flag socks as they attend the first of the day’s “No Kings” anti-Trump protests in Downtown Pittsburgh on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Protestors from the Democratic Socialists of America stand on the stairs of the City-County Building in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) A child gets a lift above the waving signs and flags in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest outside the City-County Building on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Monica Ruiz, of Casa San Jose, delivers a speech at the City County Building in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) The protests also come as Trump is increasingly flexing the powers of his office, including with the deployment of thousands of National Guard troops to respond to protests in Los Angeles over his administration’s immigration crackdown. Lt. Governor Austin Davis joined Monica Ruiz of Casa San José to speak out against the Trump administration’s forceful deportations and attacks on free speech, urging people to write letters to their elected officials. The two joined local groups including Indivisible Pittsburgh, the Pittsburgh Federation of Teachers, Partners for Progress SWPA, Progress PA, Monday’s with(OUT) Mccormick, TransYouniting, Pittsburgh Healthcare Workers and Scientists (PGHS), 50501 Pittsburgh and John Lewis Action as they marched from historic Freedom Square to the City County Building alongside people chanting and holding signs. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting A person waves a United States/Mexico flag outside of the City-County Building in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Marccedes Alex Montain Davenport of McKeesport attends the “No Kings” protest outside of the City-County Building in downtown Pittsburgh on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) “No Kings” protesters march from Freedom Corner in the Hill District on Saturday, June 14, 2025. Protesters marched from the corner to the City-County Building in Downtown, meeting up with protesters from another “No Kings” event. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) The No Kings protests were expected to be the largest single-day mobilization since Trump returned to office, organizers said. “We’ve watched as they’ve cracked down on free speech, detained people for their political positions, threatened to deport American citizens, and defied the courts. They’ve done this all while continuing to serve and enrich their billionaire allies,” said a press release from Indivisible Pittsburgh. “They think they rule — but we are bigger than even their worst aspirations.” “Actual patriots” reads a protest sign during the “No Kings” protest outside of the City-County Building in downtown Pittsburgh on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Protestors rally in front of the federal building on Grant Street in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) Protestors march down Grant Street in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) Military veteran Jeremy Field, of the West End, stands for a portrait in what he characterized as Donald Trump-inspired clown make-up during a “No Kings” protest in Downtown on Saturday, June 14, 2025. Field said it was his first time attending a protest of this kind, and the full “clown cult” costume was part of his family tradition to go all in on whatever they are doing. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) [image or embed] — Pittsburgh's Public Source ( @publicsource.org ) June 14, 2025 at 1:42 PM Trump’s military parade comes eight years after he was dazzled by a Bastille Day procession in France that he called “one of the greatest parades I have ever seen.” The day brings the former reality TV star’s longtime dream of hosting a similar spectacle to the streets of the capital, with tanks and other armored vehicles rolling beside thousands of marching soldiers in the streets and military aircraft flying overhead. Protestors rally in front of the federal building on Grant Street in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) A young girl watches as protestors march along Penn Avenue in Pittsburgh’s Strip District during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) Protestors march along Penn Avenue in Pittsburgh’s Strip District during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) Protestors stand at historic Freedom Corner in the Hill District as they attend a second of the city’s “No Kings” anti-Trump protests on Saturday, June 14, 2025. Drivers in cars passing by honked in support as speakers took the mic at the civil rights landmark. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Protestors play brass instruments on Grant Street in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) People raise signs and American flags outside of the City-County Building in downtown Pittsburgh during a “No Kings” anti-Trump protest on Saturday, June 14, 2025.  (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) The Associated Press contributed to this report . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Stephanie Strasburg stephanie@publicsource.org Stephanie Strasburg is a photojournalist and documentary filmmaker at Pittsburgh's Public Source dedicated to community journalism and trauma-informed reporting. Her recent reporting for Public Source... More by Stephanie Strasburg Quinn Glabicki quinnglabicki@gmail.com Quinn Glabicki is a writer and photographer covering climate and environment for Pittsburgh's Public Source. He is also a Report for America corps member. Quinn uses visual and written mediums to tell... More by Quinn Glabicki