Posted in DATA , Local Government , SALARIES DATA Allegheny County salaries 2015 by Natasha Khan February 6, 2016 April 3, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource wants you to know how your tax dollars are being spent. We believe it’s important to make the salaries of city, county and state employees easy for you to find because there are taxpayer dollars at stake. PublicSource received 2014 and 2015 salary data from Allegheny County through a Right-to-Know Law request, the state’s open records law. You can download the full salary data using the link at the bottom of the page. Karen Hacker, director of the Allegheny County Health Department, was the county’s highest-paid employee in 2014 and was on pace to be the highest-paid employee in 2015. In 2014, Hacker was the only woman among the county’s 35 highest-paid employees. Two correctional officers at the county jail made more overtime in the first 11 months of 2015 than any other county employee. The data presented below is for the first 11 months of 2015. Explore the county data and let us know if you find something we should report on. Contact reporter Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org. Follow him on Twitter @holmberges . Total salaries by department*** Salary ranges Gender diversity in county jobs FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Data Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan