Posted in Education , Local Government , On the beat , posts Legislative roundup: The budget saga, university funding and medical marijuana by PublicSource contributor March 17, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The State Capitol with green lights. A flurry of legislative activity, an emerald-hued State Capitol and bureaucratic bickering flooded headlines this week. Here’s a breakdown of what’s been happening in Harrisburg: University funding decisions go to Senate To staunch the effects of eight months without state support, the Pennsylvania House of Representatives passed four bills related to school funding on Wednesday. The House approved additional funding to be released to the University of Pittsburgh, Temple University and Lincoln University and a bill granting appropriations to the University of Pennsylvania’s Board of Trustees. All of the legislation would grant money for the 2015 to 2016 fiscal year — for which the state-related schools have not received any funding . The money approved by the House for the University of Pennsylvania is earmarked for veterinary activities and the Center for Infectious Diseases, according to the legislation’s text. The Senate will need to consider the funding before it’s released. Wolf says third time’s no charm Gov. Tom Wolf said he plans to veto the most recent Republican-led budget proposal, chastising the right for presenting an “unbalanced” budget for the third time in eight months. K-12 educators and state-related universities — Temple, Penn State and the University of Pittsburgh — are floundering without government funds, despite Wolf’s insistence that he’s fighting for schools. In a statement released on Thursday, Wolf said the math of the most recent budget proposal doesn’t “add up,” alleging that it creates a $1.6 billion deficit. “I urge Republicans in the legislature to stop the partisan games and come back to the table to negotiate a final budget that funds our schools,” Wolf said. Medical marijuana close to legal The state’s lawmakers haven’t been able to compromise over education funding, but they’ve reached an agreement on medical marijuana. It just took a bit more than two years. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The House passed a medical marijuana bill 149-143 on Wednesday evening, after months of failed attempts by supporters. Senate Bill 3, which includes amendments that prevent business interference and dispensaries near schools, is expected to pass in the Senate. The bill already has support from Wolf. Legalization will allow doctors and certified nurse practitioners to prescribe medical marijuana to patients suffering from a range of medical conditions including epilepsy, seizures and sickle cell disease. Reach PublicSource intern Elizabeth Lepro at elepro@publicsource.org and follow her on Twitter @LeproLiz. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Economy