Posted in Daily report , posts August 4, 2015 by PublicSource contributor August 4, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Sick days legislation Even with many businesses dissenting, the Pittsburgh City Council passed a law Monday that will require businesses within city boundaries to let employees accrue paid sick leave. Pittsburgh: Local physician accused of poaching in Zimbabwe Wildlife authorities say Pittsburgh man Jan Casimir Seski, a gynecological oncologist, took part in an unauthorized hunt near where Cecil the lion was killed in April. A Zimbabwe National Parks spokeswoman said Seski shot a lion with a bow and arrow in an area where hunting lion was not allowed. Pittsburgh: Dems nominate District 11 county council seat Committee members announced their nomination of Duquesne professor Paul Klein on Sunday. No Republicans filed for the four-year term seat. Pittsburgh: Plea in Chinese Test-taking plot Yunlin Sun is scheduled to plead guilty after being charged with taking an English fluency test and college entrance exam for another Chinese woman. Back in May, Sun and 14 other Chinese citizens were indicted for this crime. Armstrong County: Escaped inmate captured Robert Crissman, who escaped from jail last week and allegedly killed a local woman, is back in custody. Crissman, who was originally imprisoned for nonviolent offenses, is now charged with murder, theft and aggravated assault. Harrisburg: Wolf preparing to name new head of state police A governor spokesman said the governor would soon make his decision on who will lead the Pennsylvania State Police. Until then, Marcus Brown (his last pick who was voted down by the state Senate) will continue his role as acting commissioner. NATIONAL Convicted Colorado theater shooter’s fate The jury has decided the death penalty will remain a sentencing option for James Holmes, the man convicted of killing 12 and wounding 70 in an Aurora, Colo., shooting in 2012. The jury was asked to consider Holmes’ mental illness in determining if he should face the death penalty. Search for convicted bank robber who shot a police officer Memphis police officer Sean Bolton, a former Marine, was shot during a traffic stop on Saturday night. Authorities were still searching for suspect Tremain Wilbourn as of press time on Monday. Wilbourn was recently convicted of a bank robbery and was on supervised release. Investigators believe that Bolton may have interrupted a drug deal. California wildfire spreads The Rocky Fire now covers more than 50,000 acres in drought-stricken Lake County, Calif. As a result, Gov. Jerry Brown has declared a state of emergency. Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 not found The debris found on the island of Reunion is not from the missing aircraft, as originally thought. Some speculated the debris was part of a plane door, but officials say it is actually a generic ladder. Bat boy dies from accident on the field Kaiser Carlile, the 9-year-old bat boy for the Liberal Bee Jays, an amateur baseball team in Wichita, was hit by a player who was swinging his bat to warm up during a game against the San Diego Waves on Saturday. The boy died Sunday evening. IN OTHER NEWS Does not compute The journey of HitchBOT , a hitch-hiking robot, tragically came to an end in Philadelphia after someone damaged the robot beyond repair over the weekend. The robot had survived trips through Canada, the Netherlands and Germany without complications. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.