Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan May 22, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been at least six train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Gov. Tom Wolf wants the two big railroads hauling crude oil in Pennsylvania to voluntarily adopt tougher safety rules already in use by another major railroad. BNSF has slowed speed limits down to 35 mph for trains moving the product through areas with a population more than 100,000 and it has increased the frequency of track inspections on oil routes. -S tateImpact Pennsylvania. Wolf urges railroads to adopt oil train safety measures The U.S. military is concerned about crude oil trains traveling near nuclear missiles buried underground in North Dakota. – The Rachel Maddow Show. US military alarmed about oil train proximity to missile sites Federal reports and safety data show that accidents on railroads that involved fires have doubled in the past year and hazardous materials releases have increased two years in a row. – New England Center for Investigative Reporting. Rail safety fact check: Fires, spills up despite industry claim U.S. refiner Tesoro Corp. plans to use a tougher tank car to haul crude oil. The cars are typically used to carry more flammable materials and their safety features surpass new federal standards for tank cars moving crude oil. – Reuters. Tesoro building crude railcars stronger than new US rules require FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Another environmental group sues the federal government for new rules on crude-by-rail safety. Several groups have said the new standards fail to protect the public from the risks of explosive trains. – Albany Times Union. Riverkeeper sues U.S. DOT over oil train safety rules Requiring energy producers to strip more of the gases from Bakken crude oil before its hauled on trains could help prevent deadly accidents. – The New York Times. How to prevent an oil train disaster Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan