Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Retired commissioner reflects on progress of police, ongoing challenges by Jeffrey Benzing January 11, 2016 February 21, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Charles Ramsey, Philadelphia’s newly retired police commissioner, has seen how much police have progressed in almost 50 years — and he has an idea of how far they have to go yet. Early in his career, Ramsey said officers in Chicago would fight over integrated patrol cars – so called “salt-and-pepper” cars, as he told The Marshall Project recently. The fighting stopped once women were allowed in the field. None of the men wanted to pair up with the opposite sex. Departments are more diverse now, he said, but not as much as they should be. According to Philadelphia Magazine , more than half of the department’s officers are white, though the city itself is only 37 percent white (with more Philadelphia residents being black than any other ethnic group). That’s a common problem. In Pittsburgh, for instance, the Bureau of Police (which hired only 14 black officers from 2001 through 2012) is 13 percent black . Black residents make up a quarter of the city’s population. Ramsey was chair of President Obama’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing, which stressed the importance of diversity in modern police forces. The task force was created after a string of controversial incidents that left young men like Michael Brown dead at the hands of police in Ferguson, Mo. As a Chicago native, he’s watched upheaval in his former department after the shooting of teenager Laquan McDonald by police, and the subsequent lack of transparency. Ramsey describes it as a clearly “bad” shooting. As he told The Marshall Project : It didn’t take long after watching the video to figure that out. But the problem was that it took a year for [the video] to come out, and that’s almost more controversial than the shooting itself. You know, bad news doesn’t improve with age. Chicago’s police superintendent was fired in the scandal, and some have speculated that Ramsey would return home to run the department. He is instead working in private consulting. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting As Philadelphia’s commissioner, Ramsey also invited the U.S. Justice Department to review police shootings after Philly.com reported a spike in shootings, even as assaults on officers decreased. Police shootings are routinely controversial, not just for what happened, but for what the public is never told. (See our reporting on the lack of transparency in state police shooting investigations .) Philadelphia Rep. Martina White championed a bill to keep the names of officers involved in shootings secret unless they are charged with a crime. Ramsey disagrees: I feel very strongly that a police officer is a public servant…We don’t walk around with anonymity, but then when we shoot somebody, there’s an expectation that our names should not be released? I just don’t understand that logic. While Ramsey has been applauded for improving public safety, he has also led the department through scandal, including the indictment of narcotics officers for alleged racketeering. After acquittal, they returned to work . Now he’s heading to other departments, including in Wilmington , where he’s been hired as a consultant to help improve how the department works with the community. Reach Jeffrey Benzing at 412-315-0265 or at jbenzing@publicsource.org. Follow him on Twitter @jabenzing. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice