Posted in On the beat , posts High-dollar omissions in new database of payments to doctors by Halle Stockton October 7, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A new federal database of payments made to doctors by the pharmaceutical and medical device industries excludes $1.1 billion worth of transactions. And, ProPublica reports, that’s just deepening the holes in the ‘Open Payments’ database, which was released by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services [CMS] on Sept. 30. The database does show 4.4 million payments, totaling $3.5 billion, to doctors and teaching hospitals. Some information is missing because the federal government took it out because it was inconsistent. The excluded $1 billion stems from disputed or confidential payments made between August and December 2013, according to the ProPublica story . The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the agency overseeing the database, had said last week that it was not publishing any details on 9,000 payments that had been disputed by doctors or hospitals because those disputes hadn’t been resolved. It also said it would withhold data on 190,000 research payments related to drugs and devices that are not yet on the market, as is mandated by law. On a conference call with reporters, though, federal officials did not disclose that the unpublished data amounted to almost a quarter of the money drug and device makers dispensed in the final five months of last year. The agency has been skewered for what it’s chosen to omit from the database and for not being user-friendly. ProPublica reporter Charles Ornstein writes : If the federal government’s new Open Payments website were a consumer product, it would be returned to the manufacturer for a full refund. Further, the names of doctors and hospitals connected to nearly half of the disclosed payments were not released. “The government … promised to disclose this information next year once it has been corrected and verified.” CMS officials have also said they would put out tools to help people use the site. Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. Follow her on Twitter @HalleStockton. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton