In-Depth Reporting 11-year-old Keliyah wants to be a lawyer, sings a special song By Halle Stockton and video by Ryan Loew March 21, 2017 Keliyah Washington is 11 and lives in the Allentown neighborhood of Pittsburgh. As one of the younger girls to share about herself with PublicSource, we wanted to be sure she understood why she was doing it and that she was comfortable with it. When we first met, and I described the idea behind the video, she said, “Why do I have to say ‘I’m a black girl?'” I sat down on a stool next to her, searching for the right words. “Do you know what a stereotype is?” I asked. “Not really.” “Well, what do you think someone might guess about me because of my hair color?” I said, grabbing a few strands of my blonde hair. “Um…they might say you’re dumb?” Keliyah responded. “Yep. And that is a stereotype. And it’s not true. So now you get to tell people who you are rather than them assuming something about you. Would you like to do that?” She nodded, smiling. She seemed into it. She launched into talking about her favorite school topics and how her career aspirations have already changed direction. By the end of our chat, she also wanted to share one of her talents. You can hear her singing an excerpt of “Lift every voice and sing,” which she learned during Black History Month. The song is often referred to as the Black National Anthem. Their Stories Tyneisha continues quest to prove herself as a parent with a disability, but she could still lose her son ‘Young Black Pittsburgh’ ambassadors connect with the girls who shared their stories through letters The vicious cycle inside Allegheny County juvenile court for black girls and their mothers. I saw it up close. Tiara Tabb: In this black-or-white world, I want to find the gray area Jayla Wright: Relationships can tear you down and lift you up. 360 Video: Priya is a teen roboticist interested in how robots can revolutionize medicine Tyneisha thinks her disability shouldn’t disqualify her from motherhood Being 16: Janae turns to poetry to make art out of struggle Shaunese Johnson: Schools teach the same black history over and over. Students deserve better. Pittsburgh has a severe shortage of black teachers and that’s hurting black students. Tamia Law: Living in Clairton: ‘Nobody really cares unless it is football’ Getting in the game: Physical activity is a win-win for black girls Pittsburgh’s black girls face lots of inequity barriers. Advocates want tangible change. Corrine Jasmin: They say I’m pretty — for a black girl. Dezmaire gave birth in eighth grade. As a teen mom in Pittsburgh, she’s fighting to beat the odds and graduate. Maia Ervin: I am black, I am a student, and I’m tired of racism on my campus Zoe Vongtau: ‘I hid my accent and culture. I was just always the new black girl.’ She lost her mom and her home. How Monet is finding a promising future in Pittsburgh. If everyone got screened, gifted education in Pittsburgh could be more equitable. School officials aren’t sold. When some students are labeled as gifted, I see the harm done to those left behind Who gets to be considered ‘gifted’ in Pittsburgh schools?  Too few black girls. Donise Griffin: Why don’t more students at Pittsburgh’s Gifted Center look like me? Videos: Six women speak about the outlook for black girls in Pittsburgh Do black girls pay a higher price when comprehensive sex education isn’t taught? Amariah Woodson: Racism can be difficult to prove, but I think it happened to me Sienna Rodriguez-Truley: The parts of me that can’t be mixed and matched There are ways to end the school-to-prison pipeline Relive the Gwen’s Girls Equity Summit through what was discussed on social media Gwen’s Girls summit highlights how suspensions derail black girls’ education A story of two girls: Why being black means more scrutiny and punishment in Pittsburgh schools How institutions and society fail Pittsburgh’s black girls