Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Gov. Wolf steps up his crude-by-rail safety game with hiring of rail expert by Natasha Khan April 28, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The administration of Gov. Tom Wolf today announced it has hired a renowned rail expert to focus on the safety of trains hauling millions of gallons of flammable crude oil across Pennsylvania daily. Dr. Allan M. Zarembski , head of the railroad engineering and safety program at the University of Delaware, is “an internationally recognized expert in the area of railway track and structures, vehicle-track dynamics, failure and failure analysis, safety, railway operations, and maintenance,” according to a press release on the hire. “My administration is focused on the safety of Pennsylvanians and protecting people from the potential disaster resulting from Bakken crude oil train derailments,” said Governor Wolf. “I have expressed grave concern regarding the transportation of crude oil in the commonwealth and have taken several steps to prevent potential disasters. Dr. Zarembski is an internationally recognized rail expert and he has extensive experience with rail safety and risk analysis.” Philadelphia is home to many of country’s oil refineries, making the state a major destination for crude oil being fracked from the Bakken Shale in North Dakota. Sixty to 70 trains roll through Pennsylvania cities, including Pittsburgh, and small towns each week. “The potential for disaster is too great to ignore,” Wolf said in the statement. Since the start of the year, there have been at least five major derailments of crude oil trains in North America — in Iowa, Illinois, West Virginia and two in Canada. Zarembski will assess the state’s rail system and advise Wolf on safety issues and reducing risks. He’ll also identify high-risk areas and make safety recommendations, according to the press release. His contract lasts for three months. Wolf recently sent a letter to President Obama asking him to speed up federal regulatory action on improving the safety of these trains. State and federal officials have expressed frustration over how long it’s taken the administration to pass a package of rail safety rules. The rules, which include new regulations on tank cars and braking systems, are currently under review by federal regulators and could be released in May. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan