Posted in Election 2020 More than 28,000 Allegheny County voters received wrong ballot. Replacements are on the way. by Nicole C. Brambila October 14, 2020 October 14, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Allegheny County Elections Manager David Voye during a media tour on Oct. 8, 2020. (Photo by Nicole C. Brambila/PublicSource) More than 28,000 Allegheny County voters whose ballots were mailed on Sept. 28, received the wrong absentee or mail-in ballot, election officials announced Wednesday. Allegheny County Elections Manager David Voye apologized for the error. “Voters in the county should be confident that their votes are accurately counted and protected,” Voye said. “Our very system of government depends on free and fair elections and nothing underscores that more than a presidential election.” The mailing by the county contractor, Midwest Direct, impacted 28,879 voters. Allegheny County Department of Administrative Services Director Jerry Tyskiewicz said the vendor is being paid $1.16 per ballot. While the scale of the error was detected Tuesday, voters began alerting county officials about the snafu on Friday. New ballots are expected to be delivered to the U.S. Post Office beginning Thursday, Oct. 15 and most are expected to be received by voters the week of Oct. 19. If a voter mistakenly voted on the wrong ballot and returned it, those ballots will be reviewed after the election. Only one ballot per voter will be counted. Voters can check the status of their ballot on the state’s tracker system, by clicking here . Impacted voters who do not receive a new ballot by Oct. 26 may contact or visit the Elections Division’s downtown office to receive a new ballot. Nicole C. Brambila is the local government reporter for PublicSource. She can be reached at 412-515-0072 or nicole@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI