Posted in EXECUTIVE DECISION Suburban ticket splitting spelled defeat for Dugan, nearly derailed Innamorato Voters delivered narrow wins to both Republicans and Democrats in countywide races, while a judicial candidate carried Allegheny County in a landslide. by Charlie Wolfson November 8, 2023 November 9, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Ticket splitting is alive and well in Allegheny County. After an expensive and highly competitive campaign, voters went to the polls Tuesday and delivered varied results, narrowly electing Democrat Sara Innamorato as county executive and Republican nominee Stephen Zappala as district attorney, while siding much more decisively with the Democratic candidate for state Supreme Court. Turnout was high — the highest in at least the last eight odd-year elections — with two multi-million dollar county races on the ballot in a municipal election unlike any other in recent memory. Read more: Stephen Zappala wins DA race, pledges action on Downtown, South Side Voters delivered a split decision on the two major countywide races, for chief executive and prosecutor. Innamorato ended up with about 10,000 more votes than the Democratic nominee for DA, Matt Dugan. Innamorato carried 18 municipalities that Dugan lost, most of them inner suburbs of Pittsburgh. Read more: Innamorato wins executive race, offers Allegheny County government ‘connected to the struggle of everyday people’ Innamorato faced far stronger headwinds than Democratic executive candidates in recent memory, with a well-funded opponent who used a moderate campaign to try to peel off Democratic votes. That strategy almost worked, and Republican Joe Rockey won numerous precincts in the suburbs that Democrats have won in recent cycles. Innamorato’s coalition was typical of Democrats here, but margins were much tighter than usual. The city aligned with Mon Valley towns like Duquesne and McKeesport, eastern suburbs like Penn Hills and affluent pockets like Mt. Lebanon and Sewickley. But Rockey prevailed just about everywhere else, running up unusually large margins in outlying areas and carrying places like Upper St. Clair, Fox Chapel and Ross, which have supported Democrats at times in recent years. Read more: Young voters cast ballots with abortion access, student loans and book bans on their minds Ticket splitting was even more pronounced between county races and Pennsylvania’s Supreme Court race. Democratic Supreme Court candidate Daniel McCaffery won about 38,000 more votes in the county than Innamorato. More than 50 municipalities were carried by both McCaffery and Rockey — a diverse collection of communities including Moon, South Fayette, West Mifflin, McCandless and Shaler. Trafford, a tiny municipality only partly in Allegheny County with one voting precinct, was the only place to side with Innamorato and Republican court nominee Carolyn Carluccio. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Ticket splitting has been on the decline nationwide in recent years as politics are more polarized and more and more elections become tied to national movements and figures. Read more: New board members lay out their visions as PPS prepares for closures and budget cuts But local, odd-year elections can move to a different beat than federal ones. Tuesday’s results showed that, at least to some extent, local politics in Allegheny County have not gone completely tribal — thousands of voters crossed party lines and split their ballots between the two major parties. Charlie Wolfson is PublicSource’s local government reporter and a Report for America corps member. He can be reached at charlie@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , Elections , Matt Dugan , Sara Innamorato Charlie Wolfson charlie@publicsource.org x Charlie Wolfson is an enterprise reporter for Pittsburgh's Public Source, focusing on local government accountability and politics in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. He was a Report for America corps... More by Charlie Wolfson