Posted in Local Government It’s your turn to try the new My Pittsburgh App A reporter’s take: While the City of Pittsburgh-backed app is easily accessible, it’s also unfinished and might confuse users with misdirections. by Atiya Irvin-Mitchell July 18, 2023 July 18, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X This story was originally published by Technical.ly , a news partner of PublicSource. You can sign up for their newsletters at technical.ly/subscribe . What if you could get answers to every question you had about city happenings from the palm of your hand? According to the City of Pittsburgh , the new My Pittsburgh App fits the bill and can connect residents with info about city projects, summer programming and resources that could benefit them. The app was developed by Poly Platform , a local civic tech firm that participated in the most recent cohort of the PGH Labs accelerator hosted by the city. My Pittsburgh App launched on Wednesday ahead of this cohort’s closing showcase. You can download the app from the App Store or Google Play here . We're proud to launch the My Pittsburgh App, a new concept from PGHLAB. The app is designed to connect residents with valuable information about city projects, summer programming, and city resources. Download the app, test it, and tell us what you think! https://t.co/izCvMZzKdo pic.twitter.com/0OL99D5VqT — City of Pittsburgh (@Pittsburgh) July 12, 2023 Here at Technical.ly, we like to see for ourselves if apps are worth the download. So, this reporter tried out the new My Pittsburgh App. The gist so far: The app is reasonably straightforward and easy to navigate, which is welcome in a world where similar websites and applications can be overly complicated. For starters, it’s free to download, so the only consideration you’d have to make is if there’s room for it on your phone. When you first open the app, you see a list of event categories. The app helpfully gives the option of saving your favorite events. If a farmers market or “stop the violence” gathering is something you’d like to have easily accessible, the app will allow you to favorite it so that the event and its detailed description are at your fingertips. Because no two Pittsburgh neighborhoods are the same, it’s useful that the app has tabs devoted to each one. When you presses a neighborhood name, you’ll see all the upcoming events happening there. For example, if you tapped the Brighton Heights tab, you’d see that every Friday, there’s a community-led initiative called Caring Connections seeking to divert young people from the juvenile justice and or child welfare system. The app also allows users to set notifications that remind them of recurring events. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The My Pittsburgh App. (Screenshot) Besides events, My Pittsburgh App includes tabs on public meetings, citywide resources and relevant holidays. However, where the app’s strengths lie in its simplicity, its main weakness is that it’s not entirely finished. More than once while I tested this app, I’d click on an unfinished tab such as Safety or Cinema in the Park, and instead of providing me with info or events, the app would take me to an unrelated event page, such as for a farmers market. This might be confusing for some users. Plus, some categories including Water and Infrastructure feel incomplete. One might argue: Filling those tabs with information could’ve taken precedence over recreational events. All in all, the app seems like it is off to a good start, but as some of it is clearly still under construction, this reporter would advise you to keep the city website handy while seeking info. Atiya Irvin-Mitchell is a 2022-2023 corps member for Report for America, an initiative of The Groundtruth Project that pairs young journalists with local newsrooms. This position is supported by the Heinz Endowments. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow , Pittsburgh , Technology , Transparency