Posted in Daily report , posts June 9, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 9, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Hanover: Miller Chemical fire On Monday morning, the chemical plant went up in flames, causing several sealed containers to explode. Officials reported by the afternoon that the fire was under control and drinking water had not been contaminated. Locals were told not to drive by the plant and to stay inside to avoid the smoke. Pittsburgh: Cubans in Pittsburgh look forward to new relations The small Cuban community in the Pittsburgh area hopes that the U.S. Congress will decide to lift the trade embargo with their home country. They think it would allow Cuba to exchange ideas on education and culture with the U.S. and offer more opportunities to visit relatives. Pittsburgh: Shopping for healthcare coverage People with Highmark insurance might experience a 39-percent jump in premiums this year. Analysts are telling consumers to compare prices before allowing any insurance policy to automatically renew, but also keep in mind that changing insurance could also mean changing doctors. Harrisburg: Gov. Wolf recalls nomination for police commissioner If the state Senate agrees to the recall of Marcus Brown’s nomination , it could allow more time for deliberation about the controversial nominee. In a statement, Wolf said he continues to have faith in Brown. Harrisburg: Changing child-related background checks A legislative committee voted Monday to require background checks for only people who routinely and directly interact with children, instead of all employees and volunteers who work with child-centered organizations. The proposal will move on to the state House. Somerset County: Allegany College of Maryland takeover On July 1, the county will take on maintenance and operational expenses for the branch campus. The county already pays its mortgage and will own it once the note is paid off. Students and taxpayers are not expected to see any changes. NATIONAL Verdict is in: Passports must say ‘Jerusalem,’ not ‘Israel’ Americans born in Jerusalem still can’t change their passports to say they were born in Israel. On Monday, the Supreme Court decided that any legislation allowing that would be unconstitutional. The ruling also keeps the high court out of the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict. South Carolina police officer indicted At a news conference on Monday , a Charleston County prosecutor announced that officer Michael Slager has been indicted in the murder of Walter Scott, who was shot fleeing a traffic stop. The shooting was caught on cellphone video and aired by several cable news outlets. Texas police officer on leave and under investigation On Sunday, video emerged of a police officer slamming a 14-year-old girl down on the ground several times and pulling his gun on another teen. The police were called to dispel a disturbance at a residential pool party on Friday, but other details remain unclear. IN OTHER NEWS Big winners this weekend Serena Williams won her 20th Grand Slam title at the French Open where she defeated Lucie Safarova, and at the Tony Awards , “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time” won Best Play and Best Musical went to “Fun Home.” CatConLA is the first convention for cat lovers It’s like Comic Con, but about cats . The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.