Posted in Equity , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Two takes on domestic violence by Halle Stockton March 5, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The way a community deals with domestic violence speaks volumes about its views on women’s rights, and in the last week, two marginalized groups of women have seen opposite sides of the coin. Three American Indian tribes were given the authority, for the first time, to prosecute non-Indian men for dating and domestic violence crimes against Indian women. This power will be extended to all 566 Indian tribes by March 2015 under the 2013 Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act , according to a Feb. 6 article in the Washington Post . Indian tribes were prohibited from prosecuting a non-Indian defendant under a 1978 Supreme Court decision . “This represents a significant victory for public safety and the rule of law, and a momentous step forward for tribal sovereignty and self-determination,” Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. said in a statement. Holder said Native women and girls face a “shocking and unacceptably” high rate of violence. Meanwhile, women in Afghanistan are faced with a major reversal to their rights. A law that passed the country’s parliament last month would ban relatives of an accused person from testifying against them, according to a Feb. 11 story by CBS News . It doesn’t specify domestic violence cases, but advocates are reading between the lines. They argue that this law is especially dangerous in a culture where women’s interactions are almost solely with family. In practice, legal experts say, it would mean that a woman cannot testify that her uncle raped her, that a mother who sees her daughter beaten by her father or brother cannot testify, that family members witnessing a young woman being forced into marriage by her father cannot be used in a prosecution, that a sister or brother who witnesses an honor killing cannot be questioned. The law still needs a signature from Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai to go into effect. Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Criminal Justice , Women's rights Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton