Posted in DEVELOP PGH Walnut Capital seeks one-block zoning change in Oakland The Shadyside developer has asked the City Planning Commission to rezone a stretch of McKee Place a year after Oakland Crossings fell by the wayside. by Eric Jankiewicz March 5, 2024 September 24, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The City of Pittsburgh is considering changing the zoning of parcels located along the westerly side of McKee Place and Louisa Street, pictured here on Friday, March 1, 2024, in Central Oakland. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Developer Walnut Capital is taking another, smaller shot at reviving part of its plans for Oakland a year after it shelved its Oakland Crossings proposal, by now seeking zoning changes along McKee Place and Louisa Street. Councilperson Bob Charland, whose district includes the considered area, presented the request for a zoning change to the City Planning Commission. He argued that the area is currently residential but zoned as Urban Center – Employment. Changing the zoning to Residential Mixed Use would help keep the area residential. The area currently has three pre-war residential buildings and it’s the site of the former Jewish Federation headquarters. Charland introduced Jonathan Kamin, an attorney representing Shadyside-based Walnut Capital, to present the proposed change to the commissioners. “We thought a mixed use concept focusing on more residential is appropriate for this section,” Kamin said. Economy & Housing City panel to council: Take more time on tiny houses proposal for riverfronts During the first in-person Pittsburgh City Planning Commission meeting since 2020, the panel heard members of the public voice support and skepticism about a temporary housing plan. Responding to questions from commissioners, Kamin said that Walnut Capital hasn’t come up with a plan for what they want to do with the site but that it would be primarily housing with some retail. “Our intent is to redevelop it into apartments,” he said. “We wanted the zoning perfected before we spent millions of dollars on planning.” The commission will hold a public hearing in-person and online on March 19 to discuss the matter further and vote on the zoning change. The proposed change would then go to Pittsburgh City Council for its approval. Walnut Capital originally planned for the area to be part of the Oaklands Crossings project, a huge redevelopment plan that originally included rezoning of 18 acres around the Boulevard of the Allies. Plans for that larger development have since taken a “pause,” according to reports . Eric Jankiewicz is PublicSource’s economic development reporter, and can be reached at ericj@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ericjankiewicz . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: city planning , development , Oakland , Pittsburgh , walnut capital , zoning Eric Jankiewicz ericj@publicsource.org Eric Jankiewicz is a reporter focused on housing and economic development for PublicSource. A native New Yorker, Eric moved to Pittsburgh in 2017 and has since fallen in love with his adopted city, even... More by Eric Jankiewicz