Posted in DEVELOP PGH Job postings are up in Pittsburgh — so why are tech workers still struggling to get hired? New graduates and experienced professionals alike report months-long hunts and mismatched skill demands shaping a slower path to new roles. by Alice Crow September 25, 2025 September 29, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Bakery Square complex, straddling Shadyside and Larimer, is home to Google and other tech firms. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) This story was originally published by Technical.ly , a news partner of PublicSource. You can sign up for their newsletters at technical.ly/subscribe . Tech jobs in Pittsburgh are up, but there’s a disconnect: Job seekers say they still face a hiring drought. The job hunt is taking longer these days, with more candidates on the market and drawn-out hiring processes that can make the search last several months, hiring experts say. Plus, employers are looking for candidates with very specific qualifications – skills that entry-level workers often don’t have. “I’m not very confident about finding a job, honestly,” Aaron Escobar, a recent University of Pittsburgh graduate, told Technical.ly. “Jobs keep not getting back to me, and I’ve been thinking, at this point, maybe it’s just a better option to get some random job for a year and go get my master’s next fall semester.” So, he left Pittsburgh to try somewhere else. Escobar’s bachelor’s degree in digital narrative and interactive science combines computer science and English studies. He began searching for a job in December 2024, while still in school. By July of this year, when he hadn’t found anything, he decided to move back to California to save on living expenses. Escobar isn’t alone. Other local students and recent grads have expressed concerns about finding entry-level jobs in today’s market, too. The current job market reflects companies’ desires to focus on strategic rather than expansive hiring, Kelly Fetick, founder of tech recruitment firm Landis Consulting Group, said. Those conditions lead to a deliberately slower and more competitive hiring process, even as the number of tech job postings in Pittsburgh hovers above last year’s levels. “Many of the openings that exist are in highly specialized areas – AI, ML, cloud, cybersecurity – and not everyone coming into the market has that background,” Fetick told Technical.ly.  “It’s not just a numbers game, it’s a skills match issue, too.” Even seasoned professionals are struggling in today’s job market, but connections, not just experience, are setting them apart from recent grads. It’s who you know, not what you know For more experienced tech workers, job seeking can still be a months-long process, but an existing network is what’s cutting down those search times. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Levon Ritter, a Pittsburgh-based software developer with five years of experience, was laid off twice in a year. Ritter’s first job hunt after his employer shut down took him roughly seven months, but when he landed a position, he thought he was in the clear. When he was laid off again just a couple of months later due to the company’s decline in revenue, Ritter ramped up his job search, putting in 25 to 50 applications per week over two and a half months. “It felt like a full-time job,” Ritter said, and many of those roles were based outside of Pittsburgh. Employers prefer Seattle, New York or San Francisco instead. When Ritter posted on the Pittsburgh Reddit page about his experience, more than 100 comments chimed in to air their own grievances, too. What actually works in the job search? Real connections. “Having a large network is great — and almost essential at this point,” a top comment on the Reddit thread said. “Many of these positions are being filled by referrals and the public doesn’t really have a shot.” Old coworkers and other connections who could vouch for Ritter have made a real difference during the job search process, he said, which helped him land a new job last month. Success depends on where you specialize Pittsburgh is largely mirroring national job market trends, Fetick said. An analysis in August by the Bureau of Labor Statistics showed that the number of job seekers exceeded the number of openings. However, Pennsylvania’s unemployment rate of 4% sits below the national rate of 4.3%. But that lower rate doesn’t account for underemployment . Some recent grads are settling for part-time work while navigating the slow job market. H., a Carnegie Mellon University graduate who will be referred to by her first initial due to the sensitive nature of her immigration status, has applied to over 500 jobs since graduating in December. She received a graduate degree in a niche tech field and while AI and cybersecurity jobs may be booming, H. says Pittsburgh offers fewer opportunities for her specialized skill set. “Finding full-time work has been challenging, especially because I’m looking for niche roles in product design and I need visa sponsorship in the future,” H. said. “I don’t have a plan B, other than going back to my country, but I feel something will work out for sure.” Data suggests there may be reason for that optimism. In Allegheny County, most tech occupations are expected to grow by 2032, according to data from the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry. A majority of that growth will come from newly created positions and current workers exiting the labor force in the next several years. The projections are most optimistic about software development and computer system analyst roles, though, and it doesn’t bode well for all tech jobs. Computer programmer positions are expected to shrink by roughly 8%, along with engineering technician roles. Despite these challenges, some still say Pittsburgh’s tech scene is set up for steady growth — but only with the right investments. “The pace may be slower right now, but our foundation is strong,” tech recruiter Fetick said. “As new technologies mature and companies continue to invest in the region, I believe our city is well-positioned for long-term growth and success.” Update (9/29): Technical.ly removed identifying information about H., a Carnegie Mellon University graduate referred to by her first initial due to the sensitive nature of her immigration status. Alice Crow is the lead Pittsburgh reporter for Technical.ly. She joined the newsroom in September 2024 after working as a reporter for the Waco Tribune-Herald, where she covered city government, health and education. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow