Posted in FROM THE SOURCE PODCAST Teens Fighting for a Livable Planet | S4, Ep 6. Preview by Jourdan Hicks December 21, 2022 Episode Navigation Previous episode Finding home: Exploring immigration through the teen experience | S4, Ep. 5 Next episode Teens fighting for a livable planet | S4, Ep. 6 We’re back in 2023! Here’s a preview of the next episode of From the Source. TRANSCRIPT Jourdan: Welcome to From the Source. I’m your podcast host, Jourdan Hicks. We’re taking a break to observe the holiday season, so there won’t be a new episode this week. You can check out past episodes from this season on PublicSource.org and Kidsburgh.org, and it’s also streaming on Spotify, Apple Podcasts and Google Podcasts. We’re back Wednesday, Jan. 4. Next time on From the Source, Episode 6: Quill: There is a science teacher at our school who does not believe in climate change. He’s a science teacher. Jourdan: Scouts from Troop 55286 share how they became teen climate activists and why more teens aren’t engaged with environmental justice issues. Lucy: We are the most affected by it, but we have the least say in it. Like we are not able to go into Congress and make laws. We are not able to vote. Most of us were not able to put solar panels on our roofs. We are only able to have conversations and educate ourselves, and I feel like as we get older, it’s our responsibility to educate younger people. Read more: Better nature, better relationship, better planet — A conversation with a Pittsburgh urban ecologist Quill: It’s hard to make it relevant to someone when the only relevant way is bad ways or like bad things that are going to happen. Liliana: Like, the people that are in charge of the laws that are being made act like basically like the world is this, like, stress ball that they can just squeeze and squeeze and squeeze and squeeze and it will just go back to normal. Jourdan: Teens fighting for a livable planet. Top of the year, Jan. 4 on From the Source. Happy Holidays. Happy New Year. Stay safe. Be well. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Jourdan Hicks jourdan@publicsource.org instagram Jourdan is a senior community correspondent at PublicSource. Previously, Jourdan was engaged as a community-based educator in the Hazelwood section of the city. A lifelong Pittsburgh resident, she’s... More by Jourdan Hicks About Public Source About Newsletters Contact us Send tips & ideas Advertise with us Donate Membership FAQs Republishing guidelines Our partners Board of Directors Jobs Working with us