Posted in Inside our Newsroom Inside our Newsroom: How do you ‘experience stories’ as a news consumer? by Natasha Khan December 18, 2019 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A big part of my job at PublicSource is about connecting people to stories through creating experiences online. Please consider donating today. As PublicSource’s Interactives & Design Editor, I work at the intersection of journalism, design and technology to make your experience with news and information more enjoyable and entertaining. Your support makes innovative stories and design possible. Right now, all gifts are being doubled by The Fine Foundation. One of the signature projects I worked on this year was designing and developing the website for our collaborative series, Good River: Stories of the Ohio . Supported by the Lenfest Institute for Journalism and the National Geographic Society, the series focuses on the environment, economy and culture of the Ohio River watershed, produced by seven nonprofit newsrooms spanning five of the 15 watershed states. Natasha Vicens shows a PublicSource T-shirt all $50+ donors can receive this year-end. I developed the website and project brand with Louisville Public Media developer Alexandra Kanik (formerly of PublicSource!). When we set out to design the project, we knew we faced a unique challenge: a watershed is not something people identify with or generally even know about. Our goal was to create a visual space to pull people into stories and display the project’s fabulous multimedia elements — including maps, 360 videos, radio stories, documentary video and photo essays. Some of my favorite design elements from the series include the project’s cool color palette, the wavy line dividers that create subtle movement and intrigue across the site and the scrollable map on the landing page. Another highlight of my year was getting to work with our fantastic data and design interns. I worked closely with the talented Nora Mattson, an information systems major at Carnegie Mellon University, to stitch together a data page for the Covering Climate Now series , a global collaboration of more than 300 news outlets to strengthen coverage of the climate story. Most recently, I loved working and learning from Remy Davison, PublicSource’s first design intern. Remy graduated earlier this year from CMU with a degree in communications design and has created marketing materials for PublicSource, data visualizations and lead art for stories. Your donation to PublicSource will help us produce more important visual journalism that gives you, our readers, a more innovative and enjoyable storytelling experience. Give to PublicSource! Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan