Posted in COVID-19 We want to hear from you PublicSource relies on experiences and voices of our community members to track effects of the global pandemic on the Pittsburgh region. by Mila Sanina March 18, 2020 March 18, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Coronavirus is turning life as we know it upside down, but the realities are different for everyone. And PublicSource wants to hear from you. Whether you’re someone in an ‘essential’ job — like a pharmacy worker, healthcare worker or grocery store clerk — or in a situation where your life is being put on hold, whether that’s school, a job or spending time with family members, you can share with PublicSource dispatches from your day or major changes that have occurred in your routine. We can also be your outlet to share concerns as well as positive things happening in your community. With all this social distancing, we’d love to see and/or hear you. You can email mila@publicsource.org a note or send photos you’d be ok with us publishing and write in the email about yourself and what the photo(s) represent. We are also able to pair you with a reporter if you’d be up for a conversation. You can also contact us at (412) 212-6471 and leave a voice message. Help PublicSource share our community’s story and bring everyone closer together — even by virtual means. We appreciate everyone’s story and hope you and yours are well and safe. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Mila Sanina msanina@publicsource.org x Mila Sanina served from 2016-2021 as the executive director of PublicSource, a nonprofit, non-partisan newsroom delivering public-service journalism in the Pittsburgh region at publicsource.org. Under... More by Mila Sanina