Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Big pipeline projects proposed for PA won’t pay property taxes by Natasha Khan November 19, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Major pipeline projects planned for Pennsylvania won’t be subject to property taxes, as they are in some other states, because state law exempts natural gas pipelines from real estate taxes. That’s not good for small towns because it could mean they’ll host huge (and potentially dangerous) industrial projects but gain no new revenue for emergency preparedness or potential environmental impacts, critics of the projects told the Allentown Morning Call. The proposed PennEast Pipeline would start in Luzerne County, Pa., and end in Mercer County, N.J. Officials in one New Jersey township that the pipeline would traverse said the project could bring in around $383,000 from property taxes, according to the Morning Call article. In Pennsylvania townships, zilch. More from the story: “In Pennsylvania, you cannot tax machinery or equipment and personal property,” said Francis Unger, director of Lehigh County’s office of assessment… Pennsylvania is one of the few large natural-gas-producing states without a severance tax on drillers. The state also levies few taxes on the builders and operators of natural gas pipelines. That’s part and parcel of state law that specifically exempts oil and natural gas from property taxes, said Timothy Kelsey, professor of agricultural economics and a member of Penn State’s Marcellus Center for Outreach and Research . Although tax policy is different in each state, those that tax pipelines as property can produce some big money, according to the article. Some 10,775 miles of pipeline in Iowa generate $50 million to $60 million a year in property tax revenue for local municipalities, counties and school districts, according to the Iowa Department of Revenue. To learn about some big pipeline projects scheduled for Pennsylvania, check out this list PublicSource created. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or at nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan