INTRODUCING A NEW PUBLICSOURCE SERIES The Fix Stories about the opioid epidemic in the Pittsburgh region. It’s been called a public health crisis. A national emergency. An epidemic. From pills to needles, and drug deals to prescription pads, everyone has heard about some facet of the opioid addiction. There seems to be a fatigue, so will one more story help? Will another project make a difference? What more can we add to the conversation? The PublicSource team believes there’s a lot of work to be done. Many stories go untold because of the stigma surrounding drugs. Communities are left in the dark about the realities of drug use. Public discourse lacks the much-needed context of our country’s history on drugs. And, when perceptions are shaped in darkness, people are dehumanized. Through this series, titled “The Fix,” we will share with you a glimpse into the lives of Pittsburghers who have been affected by drugs in one way or another. The project will span six months with stories touching on drug policy of the past and present, and how the response by government, media and society in general have treated different groups of people struggling with addiction. As with all of our reporting and storytelling, we will look toward the future. What can be done? How can we learn from the setbacks and successes of current and former drug users, their families, social workers, first responders, doctors, law enforcement and policymakers? The people who have been brave enough to share their stories have done so as a public service. PublicSource has taken great care with each of the stories in order to provide the most authentic regional view into the epidemic yet. We hope that you — our readers — will enter this project with compassion and an open mind. Reach out to us at PublicSource with any questions or suggestions; email Halle Stockton, the managing editor, at halle@publicsource.org . You can also participate in the conversation on Facebook and Twitter . This project has been made possible with the generous support of the Staunton Farm Foundation. Stories in this series The other side of opioid addiction: Look, listen and give those of us in recovery a chance. My cycle of addiction was broken not by the system, but by people believing I was more than a junkie. For two Pittsburgh women, helping others deal with drug addiction starts with telling their own stories. Michael’s Place saved my life. I can’t stop thinking about people caught in their addiction who won’t have the same opportunity. EMS workers are on the front lines of the opioid epidemic. Here’s how they cope. In telling stories of addiction, the media should stop spreading images of stigma. EMS workers are on the front lines of the opioid epidemic. Here’s how they cope. PublicSource commits to making thoughtful choices on triggering imagery The American system of recovery doesn’t always work. My journey is proof. The darknet is transforming the drug trade. Pittsburgh is an epicenter of the FBI’s work to crack down. An illustrated look: The opioid epidemic by the numbers Jolted out of a drug haze with life-changing news: ‘I went to sleep at 15 and woke up at 23, pregnant.’ Pennsylvania lags in developing a plan of protection for infants affected by drugs The D.A.R.E. teachers said my life wasn’t normal. But for kids with addicted parents, I was. The same fighting chance: Dr. Neil Capretto compares his battle with cancer to his patients’ battles with addiction My mom has been addicted to heroin since I was 8. Her addiction has defined my life. I’m a recovering drug addict, and my daughters need me The men who didn’t disappear In the hypocrisy of the opioid epidemic, white means victim, black means addict. A timeline of drug use, policy and headlines in the United States & Pittsburgh