Posted in Election 2024 Who’s running in Allegheny County elections in 2024? Southwestern Pennsylvania could determine control of the White House, the Pennsylvania legislature and Congress. Here are the candidates running in the General Election. by Charlie Wolfson February 14, 2024 April 25, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X U.S. Rep. Summer Lee acknowledges the crowd gathered at a check presentation in August 2023, in the Hill District.(Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) The 2024 campaign season in Pennsylvania is now in full swing following April 23 primary elections. The Commonwealth is critical in the race for the White House and for control of the U.S. Senate. Allegheny County voters will also elect representatives to the U.S. House of Representatives and both chambers of the Pennsylvania General Assembly, potentially determining the majority party in each. The U.S. House has a slight Republican majority, the chamber split 218-212. The Pennsylvania House is even closer, with Democrats holding a 102-100 edge. In the state Senate, Republicans hold a 28-23 edge. The down ballot races this November could flip control of all three. PublicSource maintains this page to help voters learn who is running for legislative seats in Allegheny County. After primaries with little suspense in the region, at least nine of the county's 21 state House seats will be contested in the fall, as well as two of three state Senate seats and both congressional districts. All three statewide row offices are contested, with two Allegheny County residents front and center. Eugene DePasquale of McCandless is the Democratic nominee for attorney general and Erin McClelland of Harrison Township is the Democratic nominee for treasurer. For president, both Joe Biden and Donald Trump have already secured enough delegates to be their parties' respective nominees, and both cruised to easy wins in Pennsylvania on April 23. Third party and independent candidates can access the ballot by filing nomination papers by Aug. 1. These candidates appeared on April 23 primary ballots. Tell us: What are your questions about the 2024 elections? This story will be periodically updated. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Charlie Wolfson is PublicSource’s local government reporter and a Report for America corps member. He can be reached at charlie@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: 2024 , 2024 election , Biden , Chris Deluzio , Congress , Elections , leadstorynoshow , Nikki Haley , Pennsylvania , Summer Lee , Trump , White House Charlie Wolfson charlie@publicsource.org x Charlie Wolfson is an enterprise reporter for Pittsburgh's Public Source, focusing on local government accountability and politics in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. He was a Report for America corps... More by Charlie Wolfson