Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts A new grant for PublicSource by swalsh June 28, 2012 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource is pleased to announce that it has been awarded a grant from the Fund for Investigative Journalism for a special project that will be reported by Leah Samuel, a Pittsburgh writer. Under the award, specifics of the project are confidential until it is complete. So, stay tuned for the story, which will be on PublicSource in late summer or early fall. Samuel recently reported a story for PublicSource about Potter Township in Western Pennsylvania, which is where a Shell Oil Co. ethylene plant is slated to be built after the state lured the company with numerous economic development incentives. But Potter Township, which by law should have been consulted about the tax giveaways, was never included in Shell’s negotiations with the state. Now, the township will have to provide services for the plant and its employees despite receiving very little in taxes from the multi-billion-dollar plant. The Fund for Investigative Reporting’s award is for one story only. But the Fund, like other PublicSource funders, recognizes that investigative reporting takes time and money, and it supports that reporting as a public service in the belief that an informed public is a cornerstone of Democracy. The Fund is an independent, non-profit organization and has supported hundreds of investigative reporting projects since its beginnings in 1969. It’s first award was to Seymour Hersh, who investigated the massacre by U.S. soldiers at My Lai in Viet Nam. Those stories won the Pulitzer Prize. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.