Posted in Environment , HEALTH , On the beat , posts The world’s freshwater would’ve been gone 15 years ago if other countries consumed meat like the U.S. by Halle Stockton April 26, 2016 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X People are becoming more conscientious about the food they eat, but most shoppers are simply looking for meats that are free from antibiotics and hormones and raised in humane conditions. The majority of people aren’t thinking of the amount of water that was used to produce their steaks. But it appears that everyone should be, especially with the projected growth of two billion people by 2050, according to research and projections by Nestle, the largest food company in the world. According to a report by Reveal at The Center for Investigative Reporting : Producing a pound of meat requires a tremendous amount of water because farmers use tons of crops such as corn and soy to feed each animal, which require tens of thousands of gallons of water to grow. It is far more efficient when people eat the corn or soy directly. If other countries had been eating as much meat as Americans all along, the world’s freshwater supply would’ve been depleted 15 years ago, according to Nestle. In private, Nestle executives told U.S. officials that the world is on a collision course with doom because Americans eat too much meat, and now, other countries are following suit, according to a secret U.S. report titled “Tour D’Horizon with Nestle: Forget the Global Financial Crisis, the World Is Running Out of Fresh Water.” More and more people in the densely populated countries of China and India are consuming beef, pork and chicken, for example. In China, the rise in eating meat is being correlated to more of its people improving their socioeconomic status. Here’s more of what Nestle had to say about the “potentially catastrophic” direction, according to Reveal’s review of the secret 2009 document: Global water shortages are just around the corner. “Nestle thinks one-third of the world’s population will be affected by fresh water scarcity by 2025, with the situation only becoming more dire thereafter and potentially catastrophic by 2050.” Major regions, including in the United States, are being drained of their underground aquifers. “Problems with be severest in the Middle East, northern India, northern China, and the western United States.” Excessive meat-eating is driving water depletion. “Nestle starts by pointing out that a calorie of meat requires 10 times as much water to produce as a calorie of food crops. As the world’s growing middle classes eat more meat, the earth’s water resources will be dangerously squeezed.” See five more takeaways from the report on the Reveal page . Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or at hstockton@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @HalleStockton . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton