Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts N.Y. Gov. Cuomo bans fracking, citing health concerns by Natasha Khan December 17, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X After more than five years, a decision has been made: There will be no fracking in New York state. Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s administration made the announcement after increased calls from environmental groups to ban the practice, according to The New York Times. From the Times : “I cannot support high volume hydraulic fracturing in the great state of New York,” said Howard Zucker, the acting commissioner of health. Zucker said he wouldn’t allow his own children to live near a fracking site and that the “cumlative concerns” about fracking “give me reason to pause,” according to the Wall Street Journal. Officials also said the economic benefits from fracking would be limited. New York has had a moratorium on fracking for the past five years. Cuomo had been under pressure from both sides of the debate to make a decision: Drillers and residents who want to lease land, with claims that it would bring jobs and improve depressed economies atop the Marcellus Shale, and environmentalists who say the practice could pollute the state’s air and water and cause public health concerns. From the Times : Dozens of towns and cities across New York have passed moratoriums and bans on fracking, and in June, the state’s highest court, the Court of Appeals, ruled that towns could use zoning ordinances to ban fracking. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan