Posted in Education Tell us: How will your kids spend summer vacation? As we enter the third summer vacation since the pandemic began, PublicSource wants to know how students across Allegheny County are spending their breaks. Share your story below. by TyLisa C. Johnson and Jourdan Hicks April 26, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Donte Lane, Jr., a third grader at Fulton PreK-5 at the time this picture was taken, works on English Language Arts school work at the Boys & Girls Clubs of Western Pennsylvania's Lawrenceville location on Feb. 24, 2021. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Summer vacation is on the horizon. For some kids, it’ll mean camp with friends, practicing sports or relishing their free time. For other kids, it may mean summer programs to address learning gaps after two full years of schooling through the pandemic. As we enter the third summer vacation since the pandemic began, PublicSource wants to know how students across Allegheny County will be spending their breaks: focusing on engaged summer recreation or prioritizing academic recovery? How are Pittsburgh parents molding or modifying their kids’ summer break to account for the last two years? Last summer, Pittsburgh Public Schools and other districts across Allegheny County launched several separate summer learning programs, credit recovery programs and summer camps to shrink learning gaps resulting from staff shortages, virtual instruction and delays in mental health resources. Test data for the 2020-21 school year showed the younger students struggled more than the older students in Pittsburgh to adapt during COVID. Please let us know your plans by filling out our survey below. Note that we won’t publish anything from you without contacting you for permission, so please share your email! How will your kids spend summer vacation? How are your kids spending summer break? What’s the priority for your child's summer break? Recreation Learning and recovery Other If you chose recovery, what are you hoping your student will recover during summer break? Will this summer be a return to normal or an attempt at trying something new? What couldn’t your kids do in the last two summers that they’re looking forward to doing this summer? Name (Required) Email (We won’t publish or share this information. A reporter may use it to follow up with you.) (Required) Location Age Δ Read more: Allegheny County students look to summer school after a difficult year. But can they catch up? Read more: How Pittsburgh-area learning hubs helped students through COVID and could change how public education is delivered TyLisa C. Johnson is the audience engagement editor for PublicSource. She can be reached at tylisa@publicsource.org or on Twitter at @tylisawrites . Jourdan Hicks is PublicSource’s senior community correspondent. She can be reached at Jourda n@publicsource.org or on Facebook @Jourdan Hicks . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI TyLisa C. Johnson tylisa@publicsource.org x TyLisa C. Johnson is the Audience Engagement Editor at PublicSource. She’s passionate about telling compelling human stories that intersect with complex issues affecting marginalized groups. Before joining... More by TyLisa C. Johnson Jourdan Hicks jourdan@publicsource.org instagram Jourdan is a senior community correspondent at PublicSource. Previously, Jourdan was engaged as a community-based educator in the Hazelwood section of the city. A lifelong Pittsburgh resident, she’s... More by Jourdan Hicks