Posted in Daily report , posts June 24, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 24, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Welcoming more immigrants to the city Mayor Bill Peduto has a plan for the city to attract and retain more immigrants. His plan addresses issues of providing transportation, education and resources to help immigrants acclimate to the city. Philadelphia: Man charged with murder of transgender woman A preliminary hearing was held Tuesday where the girlfriend of Raheam Felton testified that he made advances on the victim, London Chanel, before stabbing her several times. Lebanon County: Stealing from the PTA The former president of the Lickdale Association of Parents and Faculty admitted to stealing more than $8,000 from the organization’s funds between August 2013 and 2014, and is now facing felony theft charges. Western PA: Plentiful pipeline projects Pennsylvania, Ohio and West Virginia are doling out huge amounts of natural gas right now, and plans are in the works to expedite the process even further. Pipeline construction aims to move more natural gas into New England, eastern Canada, the Midwest and the South. Statewide: Injury-related deaths in the state Heroin overdose killed more people than car accidents in Pennsylvania and 35 other states. Pennsylvania has the ninth-most drug overdose deaths. NATIONAL A push to end the flag Walmart, eBay, Amazon and Sears all took the Confederate flag off of their store shelves and Internet sites on Tuesday. On Monday, South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley supported removing the flag from the capitol. Trans-Pacific Partnership passes After months of filibustering in Congress, the Senate hit the minimum number of votes to pass a procedural vote on Tuesday. Despite wide opposition from Democrats, the second half of the bill is expected to pass today in which case President Obama would be able to sign the bill by this evening. Federal computer upgrade Millions of government employees recently had stores of personal information stolen. The government updated the computers that detected the breach, but reports from the Office of Personnel Management indicate the upgrades will probably fail to make things any safer. IN OTHER NEWS Loosen those jeans Apparently, a woman in Australia made an emergency trip to the hospital because her skinny jeans were too tight . Her calves swelled up inside the jeans, and doctors found that she had muscle damage for squatting in the pants for too long. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.