Posted in COVID-19 PublicSource launches its first podcast series to document the coronavirus experience by Mila Sanina April 14, 2020 April 14, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The people of Pittsburgh love stories about their city, as told by people who live them. That’s a theory behind why our first-person stories resonate so deeply with our readers. Our readers love reading them. But how about hearing them, really hearing them, directly from the source? Podcasts have become a journalistic form so many people have come to love. Audio is conducive to authentic storytelling and powerful narratives. That’s why we’ve been eager to experiment with podcasts. Plus, fans of PublicSource have been asking us for a while now, “When are you guys going to have a podcast?” So, the day has come. And we are launching “From the Source.” We wish the circumstances of the first season were brighter. But the pandemic is THE story now. The coronavirus has changed us, no matter what class, race, gender, age we represent, in Pittsburgh and beyond. Each week, “ From the Source ” will bring you voices and personal stories of people in our area who are coping with changes brought about by the pandemic. If you care about our region’s communities, schools and businesses, this is the podcast for you. “From the Source” is hosted by Jourdan Hicks and is launching with three episodes: a story about Dana Bannon, the owner of a hair salon in Millvale; Theresa Brown, an author and nurse; and Jordan McNeal, a graduating senior at CAPA. If you have a story you’d like to share with the podcast crew, please get in touch with us. You can text a voice memo to 412-432-9669 or email it to jourdan@publicsource.org . You can find “From the Source” on Stitcher , Spotify , Pocketcasts and wherever you get your podcasts. Thanks for listening. If you’d like to support PublicSource, please donate here . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram Mila Sanina msanina@publicsource.org x Mila Sanina served from 2016-2021 as the executive director of PublicSource, a nonprofit, non-partisan newsroom delivering public-service journalism in the Pittsburgh region at publicsource.org. Under... More by Mila Sanina