Posted in DATA , Environment , IN-DEPTH , PUBLIC SAFETY PA fifth in the nation in hazardous spills by Natasha Khan February 20, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Every year, thousands of hazardous materials move through or are stored in Pennsylvania. They may be piled up close to your house, rumbling through your neighborhood on a railcar or transported in a semi-truck you pass on the highway. We don’t often think of these chemicals — until there’s an accident. In January and February, a deluge of events has reminded us of the consequences of chemical spills. The most recent scare came when a train of cars carrying crude oil derailed last week in Westmoreland County. There were no injuries. However, when several thousand gallons of crude oil spilled, it became the largest such spill in the state since 1990, according to federal records. Near Philadelphia, there have been a series of accidents involving crude oil since the beginning of the year. Seven cars of a 101-car train carrying crude oil derailed on a bridge over the Schuylkill River, nearly spilling its contents. And broken pipes at two industrial complex spilled more than 1,000 gallons of the slick black liquid, soiling the Delaware River. It was an incident in West Virginia that grabbed the attention of the nation in January, when a little known chemical used to wash coal spoiled the drinking water for more than 300,000 residents. And in early February a spill of more than 100,000 gallons of coal slurry — sludge that’s a byproduct of coal mining — polluted another West Virginia waterway . These incidents have left the public questioning the safety of storing and transporting such materials and reminded them that hazardous-material spills have repercussions beyond the immediate impact. They can cause deaths, injuries, environmental damage, evacuations and slowed transportation for travelers. The cleanup costs can be in the millions of dollars for the companies transporting the materials. To better understand the history of hazardous-materials spills in Pennsylvania, PublicSource analyzed nearly 40,000 federal records. The records were U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) reports of unintentional hazardous-materials incidents from January 1971 to September 2013. These occurred during transportation on highways, railroads, planes and waterways. PA is fifth in the nation Don’t miss our hazmat graphic: Hazardous materials spills in Pennsylvania PublicSource analyzed hazardous materials incidents in Pennsylvania since 2000. The data consisted of U.S. Department of Transportation records provided by the Investigative News Network. View the graphic … Pennsylvania had more than 12,500 events since 2000, the fifth-highest number of hazardous-materials incidents in the nation. That’s an average of 76 incidents per month. However, only about two percent of those incidents were classified as serious. Nationally, the average is about three percent. Serious incidents include events that result in death or major injuries, the evacuation of at least 25 people or the release of a large quantity of hazardous material. Cleaning up the incidents is costly. Since 2000, cleanup costs and property damage in Pennsylvania have cost more than $34 million; 50 incidents led to environmental damage, and 86 people were injured and one person died because of a hazardous-material spill, according to federal records. There were 59 events that caused evacuations and 96 major transportation arteries were closed. Transporters of hazardous materials are required to submit reports of spills to the federal government. The government uses the data to track unsafe transporters and repeat offenders and to issue enforcement actions, according to Joe Delcambre, a spokesman for the DOT’s Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, which collects the data. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The majority of the spills in the records PublicSource looked at occurred on highways. This likely means that more hazardous materials are transported by truck than by other means. Materials include familiar items like paint and gasoline, as well as dangerous industrial chemicals including anhydrous ammonia , as well as corrosive and radioactive materials. The Pennsylvania incident that caused the largest evacuation since 2000 occurred in 2009 in Wind Gap, Pa., in Northampton County. There, 5,000 were evacuated when a tanker carrying anhydrous hydrogen fluoride swerved to avoid several deer and overturned, according to the DOT’s records and media reports. The chemical is one of the strongest acids known, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency . After the tanker flipped, emergency crews discovered liquid dripping from the tanker’s valves and piping. There were no injuries. Although the federal data seems robust, it isn’t complete. While carriers are required by law to report the incidents, not all of them do. “We try to trace accidents and incidents as best we can,” said Delcambre, the spokesman for the PHMSA. But “it’s not 100 percent,” he said. The agency now tracks unreported hazardous-materials spills by researching news articles and sifting through logs from emergency-response agencies. It’s been at the effort since 2005. From 2006 to 2008, hazardous-materials transporters in the United States failed to report 1,199 serious incidents to the federal government, according to a 2009 USA Today news investigation, which looked at the federal database of unreported spills. The unreported-spills data is not readily available on the department’s website for recent years. No agency tracks all shipments Cities with the most spills were: Lewisberry – 1,683 incidents Carlisle – 793 Mechanicsburg – 776 Harrisburg – 604 Philadelphia – 598 In Pennsylvania, the transportation of hazardous materials is regulated by several state agencies, including the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency, the Pennsylvania State Police, the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry, PennDOT and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). However, officials said that no agency they are aware of tracks the number of shipments of all hazardous materials in the state. That makes it difficult to say whether the rate of incidents is increasing. Sofia Plagakis, a policy analyst at the Center for Effective Government, a Washington research organization that advocates for better health and safety standards, said that knowing what’s out on the roads or on trains could better prepare first responders and residents in case of an accident. “Greater transparency is definitely needed regarding hazardous-waste shipments, especially if they are running through communities,” she said. “The public needs to know,” said Plagakis. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org This story is part of a collaboration led by the Investigative News Network, of which PublicSource is a member. INN and Investigative Reporters and Editors analyzed more than half a million records from the U.S. Department of Transportation as part of a national look at the impacts of hazardous-materials spills during the last 40 years. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan One reply on “PA fifth in the nation in hazardous spills” Steven_whatt says: December 22, 2018 at 1:11 am PublicSource is an independent, non-profit news group that focuses on original investigative reporting about critical issues facing Pittsburgh and the Western Pennsylvania region. It was launched to undertake in-depth reporting in the public interest. PublicSource will concentrate on issues that have a major impact on the lives of citizens and on those who have the power and responsibility to influence those events. By the way! The best essay writing service – https://www.easyessay.pro/ And Happy New Year! Comments are closed.