Posted in COVID-19 COVID vaccine resources in the Pittsburgh region by Public Source April 2, 2021 April 2, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photo via Adobe Stock) Looking for a COVID-19 vaccine has been a common experience among Pittsburghers over the last two months. As Pennsylvania begins to open up eligibility for a vaccine, there are still many challenges related to obtaining a vaccine appointment for those who want them. All Pennsylvanians, 16 years of age and older, will be eligible for a COVID-19 vaccination starting April 19. The PublicSource staff created this resource page to share what we have learned to help navigate the process. This will never be 100% comprehensive, and we can’t vouch for vaccine supply at any location. Eligibility criteria are also changing all the time, so we recommend checking both the pharmacy website and their social media accounts for updated eligibility information and last-minute doses. We hope this page helps make the process easier for you to find a vaccine appointment close to home and to share information with the people you care about. Resources Pittsburgh Jewish Community Center’s list of tips and resources Getting Pittsburgh Vaccinated Facebook Group: Monitor group for real-time updates: Getting Pittsburgh Vaccinated – COVID-19 Appointment Tip Page To help determine your eligibility, use the state’s Your Turn tool here. All Pennsylvanians will be eligible for a vaccine on April 19. The Pennsylvania Department of Health also has a map of vaccine providers you can search based off of your location. It provides phone numbers and links to providers. Use the table we compiled below for links and tips we have found to be most helpful in finding vaccine appointments. Please email info@publicsource.org with any corrections or if you are a local pharmacy that wishes to be added to the list. PublicSource’s Jennie Ewing Liska put this resource together, Danielle Cruz contributed. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI