Posted in posts Digital media innovator to lead PublicSource by Natasha Khan June 22, 2016 January 17, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Mila Sanina, deputy managing editor of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and a digital media innovator, has been named the new executive director of PublicSource, the Pittsburgh investigative reporting website, the PublicSource Board of Directors announced Wednesday. She succeeds Sharon Walsh, PublicSource’s founding editor who retired in April. Sanina joined the Post-Gazette in 2011 as its social media editor. She was promoted in 2013 to assistant managing editor for online operations and in November 2015 to deputy managing editor to supervise deeper integration of the newspaper’s online and print operations. “I am thrilled to join PublicSource,” Sanina told its staff. “We have a lot to do as a team but doing great journalism will remain our priority. We will be telling stories that engage, inspire, challenge, teach and surprise — unique stories that matter for Pittsburgh and communities at large. “We will be the source of investigations and enterprise stories, but we will also provide platforms for concerned residents who want to be part of important conversations, debate issues and find answers to questions that affect their lives. We will depend on our readers. That’s why we will produce journalism that matters to them. “We will experiment. We will be bold. We will be innovative and creative. “We will strive to build a sustainable journalist organization that is an indispensible resource for Pittsburgh, for its communities, for the smart, for the curious, for the proactive, for residents who care.” She graduated from American University Bulgaria before earning a master of Public and International Affairs degree from the University of Pittsburgh. A native of Kazakhstan, she speaks Russian, French and Kazakh as well as English. PublicSource is a nonprofit organization founded in 2011 and supported by The Pittsburgh Foundation, The Heinz Endowments, Hillman Family Foundations, Richard King Mellon Foundation, Colcom Foundation, Jewish Health Care Foundation, Knight Foundation, The George Polk Grants for Investigative Reporting and The Fund for Investigative Journalism. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan