Posted in Equity , VIDEO This festival aims to help Black children feel proud of who they are by Ryan Loew and Jourdan Hicks August 22, 2018 November 19, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Community festivals are perhaps as ubiquitous a summer pastime as neighborhood cookouts and cannonballs in the backyard pool. But for three days this summer, a series of pop-up festivals has a specific and unique goal in mind. The P.R.I.D.E. Program’s Pop Up Mini Art Festivals aim to help Black children “embrace their skin color, race, culture and heritage,” according to organizers. P.R.I.D.E. organizers also say this local series is one of the country’s only festivals created specifically for Black children. Through art stations led by teams of artists and educators, young people attending the festivals have the opportunity make traditional Ghanaian kente cloths, New Orleans-inspired masks, African dolls and more. “Our goal in all of our programming is to help young Black children between the ages of 3 and 8 understand and embrace their race, ethnicity and heritage with dignity and love,” said Medina Jackson, director of engagement for the P.R.I.D.E. Program. This is the second year the P.R.I.D.E. Program, which is a part of the University of Pittsburgh Office of Child Development, has hosted the pop-up festivals. The first festival this year was held in East Liberty in July. Two more festivals will be held this summer — one on Aug. 25 at the Homewood YMCA and the final one on Sept. 15 at the Center for Nurturing Families in the Hill District. Both festivals run from noon to 4 p.m. Admission and food are free. For more information, visit the P.R.I.D.E. Program’s Facebook page. Jourdan Hicks is a community reporter at PublicSource, she can be reached at jourdan@publicsource.org . Ryan Loew is PublicSource’s visual storyteller/producer. He can be reached at ryan@publicsource.org or on Twitter at @RyanLoew . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Jourdan Hicks jourdan@publicsource.org instagram Jourdan is a senior community correspondent at PublicSource. Previously, Jourdan was engaged as a community-based educator in the Hazelwood section of the city. A lifelong Pittsburgh resident, she’s... More by Jourdan Hicks