Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts TV, exercise affect the middle-aged brain by PublicSource contributor December 2, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X watching_tv It’s well accepted that watching too much TV is bad for your physical health. But a new study published in JAMA Psychiatry states that it has adverse effects on cognitive functions, too. Too much TV — categorized as more than three hours a day for the study — in young adulthood, coupled with low activity, may lead to deficiencies in time and resource management in middle age. The Washington Post reports that the study was conducted over 25 years, with participants aged 18 to 30. They were split pretty evenly between men and women and whites and blacks. About 93 percent had finished high school. The participants filled out a validated questionnaire every 5 years about their television viewing and activity levels. If two-thirds of the questionnaires reported more than three hours of TV viewing a day, they were designated “high” television watchers. Others were classified as “moderate.” Physical activity levels were determined by sex-specific baselines. If participants were beneath the baselines in two-thirds of the check-ins, they were categorized “low” activity. At the end of the 25-year period, the study’s 3,247 participants were evaluated by three cognitive function tests: the Digit Symbol Substitution Test, Stroop Test and Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test. When the participants with high TV watching levels and low activity levels overlapped, the odds of poor performance were twice that of people who only fit into one category. More than 3 percent of total participants fit this description. Perhaps unsurprisingly, prolonged sedentary behaviors were “associated with worse midlife executive function and processing speed,” according to the study. The study does note that performance on the Rey test, which measures verbal memory, did not seem to be affected by too much TV. A previous PublicSource story also shows that technology is changing the brains of Millennials. Communication and medical experts said the increased use of technology can shrink the brain’s frontal lobe, which can make it difficult for people to process information and interact. Internet Addiction Disorder , while not included in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), is considered a growing and significant public health threat in China and South Korea. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting In order to best curb the harmful effects of TV and technology, parents are advised to limit their children’s screentime from a young age. Reach Stephanie Roman at sroman@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @ShogunSteph . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Aging , Care of children and elderly , Internet , Technology