Posted in DEVELOP PGH Former Froggy’s site could become hub for Italian sport courts Following rejection of a controversial plan to demolish Firstside buildings and replace them with a tower, a developer wants to follow the wrecking ball with bocce balls. by Eric Jankiewicz November 28, 2023 December 13, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Brothers Michael (left) and Nicholas (right) Troiani in one of their buildings in Downtown Pittsburgh's Firstside district. They originally wanted to turn it into an apartment and office tower but are now proposing bocce courts. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) A developer wants to replace five condemned and vacant buildings in Downtown’s Firstside Historic District with four bocce courts. One of the buildings once housed Froggy’s bar . In 2020, Michael Troiani with the Troiani Group sought permission to tear down three late-19th century buildings along First Avenue and Market Street and replace them with a 385-foot apartment-and-office tower. But the City Planning Commission at the time blocked the plans in an attempt to preserve the historic district and respect the prevailing smaller scale of the district. On Tuesday the Troiani group returned to the commission with plans to demolish four buildings and create courts for people to play the sport formalized in Italy. The Troiani family began acquiring Firstside parcels around 30 years ago, Michael Troiani told PublicSource in 2020. The family took steps to repair and lease the long-vacant buildings but couldn’t find interested tenants. Several of the buildings became too dangerous for habitation. The Troiani Group couldn’t be reached for comment in time for publication of this story. During the Tuesday meeting the commission noted that the site has a national, but not local, historic designation, and thus the plan didn’t need to be reviewed by the city’s Historic Review Commission . Along with four bocce courts, the plan includes seating, trees and a chain link fence surrounding the site. Michael Troiani told the commissioners that gameplay will be arranged through paid reservations. He hoped the courts would tap into some of the bocce leagues active in the city. “This is an opportunity to have everyone mix in good society over gameplay and I think it will benefit the city for quite some time,” Troiani said. DEVELOP PGH Downtown demolition for bocce approved despite preservationist ire Pittsburgh’s City Planning Commission approved a plan to raze four Firstside buildings to make way for fenced-in bocce courts. Next up: Art-festooned Uptown apartments. Commissioner Peter Quintanilla said that the 4-foot-high chain link fence in which the developers are planning to encase the courts wouldn’t fit in with the urban character of the area. The parcel in question is zoned as Golden Triangle District C, which permits construction of parks with lighted playing courts as well as other recreational uses. “It’s not what you would imagine to see in downtown Pittsburgh; it’s a very rural character in general, the chain link fence,” Quintanilla said. He suggested that when the developers bring their proposal for a vote they should provide the commissioners with other ideas for fencing that would be more inviting. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “I’m concerned about people walking by and what would that look like for them,” Quintanilla said. The developers said they would look at other options for the next commission meeting. The developers could ask the commission to vote on their proposal during that meeting, which is scheduled for Dec. 12. Eric Jankiewicz is PublicSource’s economic development reporter, and can be reached at ericj@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ericjankiewicz . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: bocce courts , Downtown , froggys , historic Eric Jankiewicz ericj@publicsource.org Eric Jankiewicz is a reporter focused on housing and economic development for PublicSource. A native New Yorker, Eric moved to Pittsburgh in 2017 and has since fallen in love with his adopted city, even... More by Eric Jankiewicz