Posted in Environment , IN-DEPTH A different view: Germans look at shale drilling by Kirsi Jansa October 1, 2012 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Independent filmmaker Kirsi Jansa recently visited Germany to take a look at how citizens and officials are reacting to shale gas development. When the film “Gasland” aired in Germany, the public became aware that the gas industry is already fracking in that country. The reaction to the film forced Exxon Mobile Germany to rethink its strategies of how to promote unconventional shale gas development there. Germany, the world leader in developing renewable energy, is currently determining the role that shale gas might play in its energy future. For more Gas Rush Stories, click here. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Kirsi Jansa _migrated-403-kirsi-jansa@example.com Kirsi Jansa, a native of Finland, is an independent filmmaker and journalist who has lived in Pittsburgh since 2008.  She has worked for The Finnish Broadcasting Company as a freelance journalist... More by Kirsi Jansa