Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Feds will look at environmental impacts of proposed pipeline project in PA by Natasha Khan July 28, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Federal regulators will study the possible environmental impacts of a proposed $3 billion natural gas pipeline in Pennsylvania. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), which is in charge of interstate pipelines, plans to hold four public meetings in August in Pennsylvania counties the pipeline would go through. The pipeline, called the Atlantic Sunrise Project , would be an expansion of the Transco Pipeline, operated by Oklahoma-based Williams Partners, and would connect Marcellus Shale gas to the East Coast and parts of the South. Williams wants to snake about 178 miles of new pipeline through 10 counties in Central Pennsylvania: Northumberland, Schuylkill, Susquehanna, Wyoming, Clinton, Lycoming, Columbia, Lancaster, Lebanon and Luzerne. Residents and environmental groups have expressed concerns about the project over the past few months after a series of accidents at Williams-owned facilities. Those include a March 31 explosion at a liquified natural gas storage facility in Washington state, which injured five workers, and an April 23 explosion at a natural gas processing plant in Wyoming that led to evacuations but no injuries. Last year, PublicSource wrote about another proposed Williams pipeline, the Bluegrass Pipeline , that would have carried natural gas liquids from Pennsylvania through Kentucky and down to the Gulf. There was an outcry from some Kentucky landowners about the safety and possible environmental impacts of that project. The project was suspended indefinitely in late April. According to Citizens Voice , a PublicSource news partner, FERC will accept comments (they can be submitted online at www.ferc.gov ) until Aug. 18 to advise its staff on what issues it should examine about the Atlantic Sunrise Project. From Citizens Voice : Under the National Environmental Policy Act, FERC must weigh the project’s environmental effects before approving it. The agency is drafting an environmental impact statement, which involves a more stringent review process than a simple environmental assessment. According to StateImpact Pennsylvania , also a PublicSource partner, the dates and times of the meetings are: All of the meetings will be from 7 to 10 p.m. (Williams representatives will available at an open house from 6-7 p.m., prior to the FERC meeting) : Monday, August 4: Lancaster County Millersville University Student Memorial Center 21 South George Street Millersville, Pennsylvania Tuesday, August 5: Lebanon County Lebanon Valley College Lutz Hall 101 North College Avenue Annville, Pennsylvania Wednesday, August 6: Columbia County Bloomsburg University Haas Center for the Arts 400 East Second Street Bloomsburg, Pennsylvania Thursday, August 7: Luzerne County Lake Lehmon High School 1128 Old Route 115 Dallas, Pennsylvania Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan