Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan June 26, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been at least six train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Railroads try to use new DOT crude-by-rail rules to keep routes from public A federal rule that was supposed to increase transparency of crude oil rail shipments is now being used by Norfolk Southern and CSX railroads in a Maryland case to justify arguments to keep that information hidden from the public, according to McClatchy Newspapers. Environmental think tank sues Obama administration over records request about crude oil exports If a decades-old ban on exporting crude oil from the U.S. gets lifted, it could mean more crude oil trains on the tracks, according to The Stranger. Canadian authorities lay down new criminal charges in Lac-Megantic derailment A rail company president, its CEO, the train’s engineer and several managers could face fines or jail terms for alleged violations of the Canadian Rail Safety Act and the Fisheries Act related to the 2013 Quebec disaster, which killed 47 people, according to The Toronto Star. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor U.S. court throws out railroad industry challenge to California oil train law The Association of American Railroads and two railroad companies filed a complaint last year seeking to block the law, which requires spill response plans and other safety measures for trains hauling crude oil, according to Reuters. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan