Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts Wisconsin legislature tries to oust investigative journalism site from university campus by swalsh June 10, 2013 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Wisconsin legislature thinks that the Wisconsin Center for Investigative Journalism should not be associated with the University of Wisconsin. The Center and its director, Andy Hall, are friends and collaborators with PublicSource. Hall works with the university’s journalism students and a small staff to do reporting that’s much needed in the state. Their stories, many about the political goings on in the state capital, are carried by other media outlets. We wonder who in the legislature Wisconsin Watch, the center’s website, offended? Hall said he doesn’t know. But one legislator made the comparison that a state university wouldn’t offer office space to Fox News. Well, no, Fox News is a for-profit company. Wisconsin Watch is a public service website that is supported almost entirely by foundations and individual donations. This is the world that more than 80 investigative websites throughout the country, like PublicSource, inhabit. We’re sending our support to Hall and his staff. We know they’ll keep up their terrific work no matter what the legislature decides. See the NiemanLab story on the Wisconsin Center here. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.