Posted in Daily report , posts May 19, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 19, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Statewide: Primary elections today Head to your nearest polling station : It’s time to choose nominees for state Supreme, Superior and Commonwealth courts, as well as several local municipalities and school boards. Pittsburgh: Plum faculty to attend class on reporting sexual abuse Today, Plum teachers are attending a refresher course on how and when to report sexual abuse, in the wake of the ongoing sex scandal at the school . Tomorrow, one of the charged teachers will attend his hearing. Pittsburgh: Bloomfield poses problems for bike share The city’s Department of Public Works has set up bike docks and kiosks in the planned locations of Oakland, Downtown and Shadyside, but the Bloomfield Citizens Council hasn’t decided on any locations to install the docks. Harrisburg: PA football standout dies at 25 Adrian Robinson , star player at Harrisburg High School, who went on to play defensive end for Temple University as well as the Steelers and Eagles, died on Saturday. The cause of death has not been released. Philadelphia: Amtrak faces multiple lawsuits Four passengers now seek compensation for injuries sustained during last week’s deadly train crash, in addition to an Amtrak employee who filed the first suit on Friday. Amtrak also faces a potential $200 million payout to the crash victims. NATIONAL Deadly Texas motorcycle gang violence In Waco, Texas, on Sunday, five motorcycle gangs brawled in the parking lot of a Twin Peaks restaurant before drawing firearms that killed nine and wounded 18 people. Police arrested about 170 people at the scene. Demilitarizing the police President Obama banned the federal provision of providing some types of military-grade weaponry to police forces on Monday, in an effort to curb violence between citizens and officers. For more information, see our post on it. New presidential candidate expected Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) said Monday that he will announce on June 1 whether he’s running for president or not, although he’s pretty much revealed that he will. Female staffers on Capitol Hill Based on the results of a survey by the National Journal , it appears that gender discrimination pervades Congress. Female staffers are infrequently allowed one-on-one access to their bosses and average salaries $10,000 less than male staffers. IN OTHER NEWS Ice hockey returns to Sochi As the World Hockey Championships came to a close on Sunday, Russian President Vladimir Putin played an exhibition game against retired NHL players in Sochi. Putin’s team won 18 to 6, and eight of those goals were scored by the Russian president. President Obama on Twitter is #awesome On Monday, President Obama (@POTUS) officially joined Twitter . His first and only Tweet so far: “Hello, Twitter! It’s Barack. Really! Six years in, they’re finally giving me my own account.” The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.