Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 24, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 24, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Housing Authority to replace units in disrepair The Housing Authority Board is allotting $16 million to replace housing for elderly and disabled tenants in the Northview Heights building. The board says the work will be complete in 18 to 24 months. Pittsburgh: Firefighter arrested for club theft Authorities arrested a city fireman on charges that he stole $1,000 from a safe in the Carrick Lit Club . The club’s owner and the fireman had been friends and previously worked as business partners. Eastern Pennsylvania: ACLU sues for quicker treatment The American Civil Liberties Union and a Washington, D.C., law firm are suing the state to speed up the restoration process that patients with mental illness are required to go through to be deemed fit for trial. They want to whittle the time to 7 days; it currently can take more than a year for treatment. Monroe County: Frat brothers charged with hazing murder Five brothers of Pi Delta Psi are charged with killing Chun Deng , a pledge who died after a hazing ritual in December 2013. Blindfolded, Deng and other pledges were forced to carry weighted backpacks while fraternity brothers repeatedly tackled them. Statewide: Stable the horses Gov. Tom Wolf may pause horse racing across the state, according to a spokesman. The sport is another casualty of the budget stalemate, which has been going on for more than three months. NATIONAL Ryan decides to run Rep. Paul Ryan , R-Wis., announced he will officially run for speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives. Voting will take place on Wednesday, and current Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, will resign Oct. 30. The other Washington race Lincoln Chafee , former governor of Rhode Island, dropped out of the 2016 presidential race. The remaining Democratic nominees — Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders and Martin O’Malley — will come together Saturday at the Democratic Party’s Jefferson-Jackson dinner. Shooting at Tennessee State University Authorities say they have identified the man who was killed during a shooting on the school’s Nashville campus . The 19-year-old Memphis man was not a student, they said, and the shooting was an isolated incident, sparked by an argument over a dice game. Three students were injured. WORLD Sword slashing deemed a hate crime A masked swordsman killed a student and teacher when he attacked a school in Trollh ättan , a town in southern Sweden. The area has a large immigrant population, and police are calling his act a hate crime. The attacker was fatally shot by police. Patricia battering Mexico Hurricane Patricia , a Category 5 storm, started pummelling residents Friday. This is the strongest storm to infiltrate the Western Hemisphere. IN OTHER NEWS Vader takes down Lenin After Ukraine’s newly instated “decommunization” laws, artist Alexander Milov converted Odessa’s statue of Vladimir Lenin to a rendition of the Sith lord, Darth Vader. Milov added a helmet and cape made from titanium alloy to the gypsum statue. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI