Posted in Equity , HEALTH , On the beat , posts Brothers with disabilities fight to keep Ohio home by Halle Stockton August 19, 2014 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Three adult brothers with developmental disabilities have lived all their days in a Columbus, Ohio, home that’s been in the family for generations. But the structure that holds possessions and memories is set to be demolished, the Columbus Dispatch reports . The house is filled with a hoarder’s amount of belongings and filth and it’s blighted and unsafe for the Klein brothers — Fred, 71, Harry, 68, and Chris, 59 — city code officials told the newspaper. Not only is the city planning to take their home, but the brothers may also be charged $15,000 to $25,000 for the demolition. The city could waive the charge. Harry [Klein] said he and his brothers — all of whom have developmental disabilities and no income other than modest Social Security payments — are devastated. The court’s offer to let them remove some of their belongings means little, he said. “We ain’t got nowhere to go with it. What’s the use of taking things you can’t keep?” It would cost the Kleins about $75,000 to bring the house up to code, another impossible cost for the trio. Two of the brothers have a court-appointed guardian who is trying to find a new home for all three of the men. A Medicaid waiver cannot be used to pay rent, but it can afford them the support they need to find a place to live, according to the Dispatch. The Kleins are currently staying with their sister. “This is the next step in the process to obtain a safe and healthy residential placement for Fred and Harry,” Kevin Craine, [a lawyer who acts as guardian for Harry and Fred,] wrote in an email. “The ultimate goal will be to provide a supported living environment which includes suitable housing with a full array of supportive services from a certified provider.” After noticing an absence of supports in the brothers’ case, a judge in an Ohio county court began developing a program to address hoarding and the associated mental-health issues , the Dispatch previously reported . The program would be the first of its kind in Ohio. Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Disabilities , Overlooked communities , Vulnerable populations Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton