Posted in Equity , On the beat , posts Relive the Gwen’s Girls Equity Summit through what was discussed on social media by Eric Holmberg October 14, 2016 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto speaks at the Gwen's Girls Equity Summit The Gwen’s Girls Equity Summit highlighted the challenges and inequalities that affect black girls in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. Black girls experience higher rates of violence, more incidents of discrimination in school and more poverty at home than white girls. Those disparities were highlighted in a new report, released Friday, that was funded by the FISA Foundation and The Heinz Endowments. The conference included top local officials including Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto and Dr. Karen Hacker, who leads the Allegheny County Health Department. The main panels featured discussions about inequalities in education, the juvenile justice system and in areas of health and wellness. PublicSource had a storytelling space at the conference where attendees could tell their personal stories of experiencing bias or discrimination. If you didn’t have a chance to come to the event or follow it live on social media, these tweets will give you a good sense about what was discussed: [ View the story “Gwen’s Girls Equity Summit 2016” on Storify ] Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Diversity , Overlooked communities , Vulnerable populations , Women's rights