Posted in Daily report , posts September 12, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 12, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Armory added to revitalization plan The Urban Redevelopment Authority voted to include Shadyside’s Hunt Armory in a project that would provide funding for housing for low-income residents in East Liberty. Redevelopment of the armory could generate $500,000 to $1 million to be used for affordable housing. Pittsburgh: Local college joins Heads Up The Community College of Allegheny County joined three other local universities in President Obama’s Heads Up campaign, announced Wednesday. The plan raises awareness for America’s College Promise, which will provide funding to high-achieving students for two years of community college. Pittsburgh: Is Uber apologizing to CMU? The ridesharing service will give $5.5 million to Carnegie Mellon University to provide for a robotics chairperson and three fellowships. Some say the gesture will give Uber a better chance at partnering with other research universities in the future after it hired away CMU faculty members. Pittsburgh: Onto “headsetgate” The NFL is reviewing a communication error that may have cost the Pittsburgh Steelers a game against the New England Patriots. Steelers coach Mike Tomlin claims the Patriots’ radio network interfered with the Steelers coaches’ headsets, making it impossible for them to talk. Allegheny County: County receives grant to examine rape kits A federal grant of $254,437 will be used to test 400 rape kits in the county. The grant is part of the government’s $79 million attempt to examine 70,000 kits that are backlogged in 27 states. Statewide: Quality-based health care pitched The Pennsylvania Department of Health announced an initiative that would pay doctors and hospitals based on the quality of care they give to patients. Medical professionals are currently paid based on the number of people they treat. Allentown: Developer tried to bribe mayor A Bethlehem developer pleaded guilty to a bribery conspiracy charge. He contributed to Mayor Ed Pawlowski’s campaign for U.S. Senate in exchange for favorable treatment in the city. Pawlowski’s attorney said he did not misuse his office during the campaign. NATIONAL Iran nuclear deal passes Democrats in the Senate blocked a Republican attempt to shoot down the Iran nuclear deal, effectively securing the accord . The party heavily credited President Obama for the win, which may be one of the largest achievements to be won without Republican votes. First blood pressure number should be lower A National Institutes of Health study was so conclusive it was halted, with NIH officials saying that lives could be saved if the systolic (first) bp number was lowered for many people. Florida man accused of trying to bomb 9/11 memorial Authorities charged Joshua Ryne Goldberg with plotting to attack a 9/11 memorial in Missouri with a bomb made out of a pressure cooker and rat poison . Goldberg had instructed an undercover FBI agent to put the bomb by a memorial in Kansas City. Baltimore mayor will not seek re-election Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake, 45, will not run for office again. She said she wants to focus on running the city during the trial of the six police officers who were involved in Freddie Gray’s arrest. Serena Williams defeated in U.S. Open semifinal Roberta Vinci of Italy beat Williams , ending her chances of competing in the Grand Slam. In an interview after the match, Vinci said she didn’t originally think she could beat Williams. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Shooting in Union Station A man stabbed a woman and was shot by a security officer in the food court at Union Station in Washington, D.C. Authorities evacuated the area but quickly reopened it after determining that no active shooter was onsite. Photos of shooter’s home released Authorities have released pictures of the booby-trapped apartment of Colorado theater shooter James Holmes. He was sentenced to life in prison without parole last month. IN OTHER NEWS Dino for sale The skeleton of a young Allosaurus dinosaur will be up for auction in Britain starting in November. The distant relative of the Tyrannosaurs Rex was discovered in Wyoming in 2009, and is expected to sell for between $460,000 to $770,000. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.