Posted in Community storytelling Interns bring new beats to Pittsburgh journalism Include the work of PublicSource’s spring 2024 interns in your information playlist. by Rich Lord February 29, 2024 February 29, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photos by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Discovery, by its very nature, isn’t repeated. That first time you taste a new favorite food, hear a mind-blowing song or read (or write) a kick-butt story, it brings a feeling that’s euphoric, but tinged with sorrow that the unique rush of emotion is not coming back. Take, for instance, that moment when Miranda Jeyaretnam first heard Khruangbin’s tune “Time (You and I).” “My partner and I were in the car, with the impossible Singapore sun beating down on us through the windshield,” Miranda said. “The lyrics speak to my perennial nostalgia, and its Southeast Asian-influenced sound reminds me of home, especially since moving halfway across the world.” Miranda is one of PublicSource’s spring 2024 interns, a quartet of young people loaded with skills and experiences, but for whom each story is still a new experience. You’re already seeing their contributions to our coverage through fact-checking, photography and the advertising on our site and in our newsletters. Look out for coming stories. Here are the details on our team’s newest members: Read more: Binge what the PublicSource interns are bingeing — and then watch them change Pittsburgh journalism Delaney Rauscher Adams , an editorial intern, would relive that first listen to Ethel Cain’s wrenching “A House in Nebraska.” She’s getting her initial immersion in news writing, covering a high-profile labor case and more, after serving as an opinions columnist at The Pitt News in this, her junior year. Hails from: Media, Pa. College: University of Pittsburgh Area(s) of study: Public and professional writing Other extracurriculars: Vice president of an a cappella group, Ethics and Debate Club Other journalism experience: Interned at Sampsonia Way Pleasures (guilty or otherwise): Reality TV, reading and rom-coms Read more: Updated: Adda owner offers severance, nixing union petition Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Pamela Smith , the photojournalism intern, is the managing editor at The Pitt News during her senior year. A photographer with writing chops, she previously served there as visuals editor. The crunchy-but-also-orchestral song “Wonder” by Wand was a revelation she’d experience anew as she’s getting training in document-and-data-driven journalism at PublicSource. Hails from: New Jersey College: University of Pittsburgh Area(s) of study: English nonfiction writing and history/philosophy of science Other extracurriculars: Photography Club Other journalism experience: Interned with the Pittsburgh City Paper, does freelance photography Pleasures (guilty or otherwise): Playing the violin, reading, writing and watching hockey (go Devils!) Read more: Misinformation’s antidote? Fact-checked journalism Alina McMahon , alone among PublicSource interns, has been here before. In her junior year, she’s in her second stint as the advertising and business partnerships intern, so it doesn’t have quite the sizzle as her first listen to SZA’s scorching “F2F.” Hails from: Richmond, Virginia College: University of Pittsburgh Area(s) of study: Marketing, film and media studies Other extracurriculars: Vice president of consulting for Pitt’s American Marketing Association, marketing and outreach coordinator for Collab Arts Other communications experience: Interned at GH Advertising and Responsival Pleasures (guilty or otherwise): The TV show “Shameless,” which she has watched all the way through three times Read more: Pitt and CMU have grown wealthier through private, offshore investments. We followed the money. Miranda Jeyaretnam brings the irrepressible-but-nostalgic vibe of “Time (You and I)” to the public safety beat as an editorial intern. Just graduated, she served as university editor, opinion editor and a reporter at the Yale Daily News. A close second to Khruangbin’s hit: She’d love to bring fresh ears to the “Larry” episode of the “Heavyweight” podcast. Hails from: Singapore College: Yale University Area(s) of study: English language and literature Other extracurriculars: Published longform article in The New Journal Other journalism experience: Interned as breaking news and public safety reporter at The Indianapolis Star Pleasures (guilty or otherwise): Reading and writing, with a particular interest in ecocriticism, post-colonial literature and queer writing, plus baking, lifting and maintaining her NYT crossword streak Read more: Citizen Police Review Board calls for review of co-response model, expanded crisis intervention services Checking facts, assembling info, writing stories, creating visuals, deepening business partnerships — none are guaranteed to rival “Wonder” for richness or “A House in Nebraska” for emotional depth. (And forget about matching “F2F.”) But no two days in journalism are the same, and discovery is at the root of the reporting process. While each member of the intern team explores Pittsburgh, we hope they’ll bring you insights that you won’t be able to get out of your head. Photos by Stephanie Strasburg. Rich Lord is PublicSource’s managing editor, and can be reached at rich@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: higher ed , higher education , journalism , leadstorynoshow , photojournalism , Pittsburgh , University of Pittsburgh , workforce , yale Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord