Posted in DATA , In the balance: PA Supreme Court 2015 , IN-DEPTH 2015 PA Supreme Court Voters’ Guide by Eric Holmberg November 1, 2015 June 12, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X On Tuesday, Nov. 3, voters will decide the direction of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court by electing three new justices to the seven-member court. The remaining members of the court are evenly split — two Democrats and two Republicans — so this election will determine the political makeup of the court for years to come. A Pennsylvania Supreme Court judge is elected for a 10-year term with the possibility to be retained for another 10-year term on a yes/no vote. Judges, however, are required to retire at the age of 70. Since very few cases go to the U.S. Supreme Court, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court often makes final rulings on state law. The court deals with cases about civil rights, religious rights, the environment and redistricting of congressional districts, among other important issues that will affect Pennsylvanians. Use this PublicSource voters’ guide to make an informed vote for this historic state Supreme Court election. PublicSource asked each candidate four questions, and their responses have been edited for length and clarity. A link to each candidate’s full statement is provided. Click on each candidate’s name for more information. You can also download the printable guide here. *Campaign contribution data current as of Oct. 19, but may not contain every contribution from Sept. 15 to Oct. 19. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Campaign finance