Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Sinking ground could mean costly repairs for California by Eric Holmberg June 11, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Water pump So much water is being pumped out of California’s underground aquifers that the ground is sinking at historic rates — some areas dropping more than a foot per year, according to Reveal News . The worst sinking in 50 years is happening because groundwater now supports a majority of the state’s water needs, with most of the water going to agriculture. According to the story : But the extent of the problem and how much it will cost taxpayers to fix are part of the mystery of the state’s unfolding drought. No agency is tracking the sinking statewide, little public money has been put toward studying it and California allows agriculture businesses to keep crucial parts of their operations secret. The sinking phenomenon, which is called subsidence, cost the state an estimated $1.3 billion to mitigate some of the effects from the state’s last substantial period of sinking in the 1960s. The sinking did not slow until the 1970s, after California had completed its massive canal system – the most expensive public works project in state history. It delivered water from wetter parts of the state to farmers in the Central Valley and elsewhere, relieving their reliance on groundwater. The state did a comprehensive survey for sinking in the 1970s, but the state hasn’t done a similar survey since. Today, the U.S. Geological Survey has already found some effects from the sinking, such as two bridges in Fresno County that have sunk so much that they are nearly underwater. Other categories of infrastructure such as roads, railroad tracks and canals are also threatened by the sinking ground. However, costly repairs to all of these systems aren’t currently being blamed on the sinking problem. “We tried calling the railroads to ask them about it,” [Claudia] Faunt [of the U.S. Geological Survey] said. “But they didn’t know about subsidence. They told us they just fixed the railroads and categorized it as repair.” Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @holmberges . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Agriculture , Economy