Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts PA releases information on crude oil coming through the state by Natasha Khan October 8, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X After months of keeping it under wraps, Pennsylvania officials have released information on crude oil shipments from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale transported by rail in the state. The Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency released the information today after several news organizations filed appeals to public records requests for the information. Railroads Norfolk Southern and CSX had 30 days to appeal, but it seems they opted not to do that. The data shows CSX transports crude oil through 12 counties in the state. In Allegheny County, the railroad estimates it runs 1 to 5 trains on both the P&W route (the line goes from Rankin North through Pittsburgh, according to Wikipedia ) and the Pittsburgh route, each week. Norfolk Southern also provided maps of where it transports Bakken crude. In May, the U.S. Department of Transportation ordered railroads to give states shipping information of lines where they transport at least one million gallons at a time of crude oil from the Bakken Shale. Several states were quick to make the information public, including California, Illinois and Washington. PublicSource and other news organizations filed Right-to-Know requests for the information, but were denied because the state came to an agreement with railroads to keep the information confidential. The railroads cited potential terrorist threats and business reasons for keeping it under wraps. Several news outlets, including McClatchy Newspapers , appealed the denial. Pennsylvania’s Office of Open Records told state emergency response officials to make the information public, after saying it was neither proprietary nor sensitive for security reasons. Come back to our website for more on the release of the information. Previous reporting from PublicSource on oil trains carrying Bakken crude: http://www.publicsource.org/from-the-source/pa-must-reveal-crude-rail-information-open-records-office-rules#.VDWduo1dX5k http://www.publicsource.org/investigations/top-pittsburgh-emergency-response-official-talks-about-risks-of-crude-oil-trains#.VDWiEo1dX5k FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan