Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts New poll: Wolf has 24-point lead over Corbett in PA governor’s race by Eric Holmberg September 12, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Tom Wolf Democrat Tom Wolf continues to hold a large lead over Republican Gov. Tom Corbett in the governor’s race, according to a Quinnipiac University poll released Thursday. Wolf leads Corbett 59 percent to 35 percent, and likely voters favored Wolf on the race’s two biggest issues: economy/jobs and education. And, just two months before the election, the poll showed there may not be a lot of undecided voters left. More than 80 percent of the likely voters polled had already made up their minds. The race changed little over the summer as Wolf has maintained a double-digit lead in the polls despite Corbett spending twice as much as Wolf on TV ads. Quinnipiac University surveyed 1,161 likely voters from Sept. 3 to Sept. 8 on land lines and cell phones. The poll’s margin of error is 2.9 percentage points. The poll found that 51 percent of respondents who said they were voting for Wolf made the distinction that their votes were more about opposing Corbett than supporting Wolf. More than 40 percent of those polled had a “strongly unfavorable” view of Corbett. Meanwhile, 28 percent of respondents had a “strongly favorable” view of Wolf, though 26 percent of those polled felt they hadn’t heard enough about him. However, voters will have the chance to hear more from both candidates. The first of three gubernatorial debates will take place at the Pennsylvania Chamber of Commerce in Hershey on Sept. 22. Then a few days later, the summer fundraising data for both candidates will be released. We’ve already seen glimpses of large donations that will appear in the new figures. For instance, the Republican Governors’ Association announced last week that it recently gave Corbett $3.5 million . Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.