Posted in Daily report , posts August 19, 2015 by PublicSource contributor August 19, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Study shows racial gap for loan approvals Twice as many black people as white applicants in Allegheny County are denied a mortgage, according to the Pittsburgh Community Reinvestment Group . The 21st Annual Mortgage Lending Study said bad credit history was the biggest reason. Pittsburgh: County dispatchers relocated due to bedbugs Officials who take 911 calls in Allegheny County moved from their main building to temporary sites after finding an infestation of bedbugs Tuesday. Their offices are being treated, which could cost about $100,000. Pittsburgh: Going back to machetes and swords A cashier brandishing a sword chased away two teenagers dressed as ninjas and armed with a machete Friday night. As of Tuesday afternoon, the suspects who attempted to rob the Perry Market had not been found. Washington County: Heroin overdoses spike Canonsburg police are investigating 17 overdoses that may have lead to three deaths in a 24-hour period over the weekend. Three people were saved when emergency responders used the antidote Narcan. Statewide: Study reveals increase in car accidents Pennsylvania traffic accidents increased by 7 percent in the first six months of 2015 compared with the same time period in 2014, according to the National Safety Council. Injuries increased by 30 percent nationally. Scenery Hill: Fire ravages historic inn A fire damaged the Century Inn, a stone bed and breakfast that opened in 1794, Monday. No one was injured. Officials are attributing the blaze to a mechanical malfunction. NATIONAL Women to get ranger status Two female soldiers will graduate from the Army Ranger School , becoming the first to graduate the Ranger Course. However, they cannot be part of the Ranger Regiment, which is still closed to women. Lawyers argue for new trial for Boston Marathon bomber The lawyers of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev want the bomber to get a new trial in a new location. They argue that excessive media coverage made it impossible for the jurors to remain unbiased. Obama plans to cut methane emissions The administration announced a plan that would cut methane emissions by 40 to 45 percent over the next decade. This proposal is the first federal regulation that would limit emissions of the greenhouse gas. Prep school rape case goes to court A 16-year-old girl testified that Owen Labrie, a graduate of the St. Paul’s School in New Hampshire, raped her when she was a freshman. She said she met Labrie as part of the school’s “senior salute,” a tradition in which soon-to-be-graduated boys pursue younger students. IN OTHER NEWS First aquatic flower A team of scientists is claiming that the Montsechia is the oldest fully submerged aquatic flower. The plant thrived under water about 130 million years ago and was recently discovered by the team. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.