Posted in Equity #PublicStreetsPGH – A PublicSource social media project by PublicSource contributor September 11, 2017 December 2, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Rivers. Yellow bridges. The inclines. These elements are ubiquitous in cliche shots of Pittsburgh. It’s not a secret: Our city is photogenic. Yet we Pittsburghers know that our strength is in people, our neighbors and stories we share with one another. We, at PublicSource, try to capture these voices in our reporting. Our readers know that our stories are about people and challenges they face. And we want to tell more of these stories, in different formats, on platforms people use. So, that’s the reason we at PublicSource are thrilled to share our mini-project PublicStreets. We launched in the summer of 2017 and haven’t stopped since. It’s an effort to bring authentic voices from Pittsburgh’s streets to you: citizens’ ideas for a better Pittsburgh, challenges, adventures and passions — you will find all of it in PublicStreets. This project is an occasional series focusing on stories from the neighborhoods of Pittsburgh. Usually, we’re simply exploring a neighborhood at random, but sometimes we will have special themes. Follow this series on our Facebook and Instagram with hashtag #PublicStreetsPGH and share these stories. If you have suggestions or ideas, we’d love to hear from you at mila@publicsource.org . Krithika Saraswathy Pennathur Jameelah Luster Carolyn Biglow Diarra Imani Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Frank McGinnis Alyssa Bihary Imani Batts Sarah Stephens Harold James Alana Coles Nick Noir Eddie Charalambous Angelique Grimm and Melissa Mitchell Patty Hess Taylor Anderson Tre Murray Charlotte Ka Karen Roguski Zach Hammonds Quinton Zigler Bernard James John Jones Tricia Dignon Darius Daniels Hannah Joharchi Geri Acrie James Manns Matthew Petronio Peter Stumpf Tracey Hopkins Dick and Kay Jennings Neashia Johnson Charlotte Wlodkowski Pete Pross and Kenneth Hairston Zuri Williams Javon and Ricky Williams Mary Kate Ranii Christian Polk Terri Winaught Bert Micholas Chelsea Carbaugh Denise Johnson Elizabeth Colland Paige and Beatrice Girl Scout Troop 52910 Mohawk Jesse Teresa Bradley Belinda Faulk Emily Kane Aniket Patil Jenelle Rubenstein Tyler Moloney Jason Elias Domenic Betters Andrew Stump Dennis Jordan Jeffro Coffey Moshe Baran Christine Graziano Kenneth Pelton Samuel Ressin Benjamin Behanan Pete McQuillin and Nancy Chubb Masoud Sayles Billy Anger Diane Katz Selena Marcia Smith Jay Walker and Bridget McCoy Robert Wylie Bud Hicks Claire Hortens Shelley Earl Melissa Ciccocioppo Lillian Micah Dupree Joshua Darnley Mike Pastorkovich Suzanne South Karen Fuller Marcel Schipper John Johnson Chris Englert Lee White Amy Oddo Christopher Kelsey Shirin Fozi Jonathan Reyes Julia Camo Taha Ahmed Sabeen Iqbal Ruchi Singh Rup Pokharel Romana King Bruneri Jillian Hernandez Joe Weiss Ying Marcus Hillary Nick DiMinno Alice Abiya Jo Riley Chris Ruffim Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI