Posted in Environment , Inside our Newsroom , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY PublicSource reporter awarded $15,000 ASU/Knight Foundation grant by Alexandra Kanik March 23, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource reporter Natasha Khan has been awarded a $15,000 Knight-Cronkite Alumni Innovation Grant. She is one of four Arizona State University graduates from around the country to receive the award from a special journalism innovation fund for alumni of the Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication. Khan, a 2012 graduate of ASU, who covers the environment and energy for PublicSource, will use the money from the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation to look at the effects of shale gas operations on families living near drilling sites. She will publish a series of multimedia stories on the topic on the PublicSource website and with our 47 media partners around the state. Read more about the grant here. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy , Overlooked communities