Posted in IN-DEPTH , Under the Keystone Steep Street Music Man by Alexandra Kanik February 11, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X All photographs © Michael Novara Michael Novara (Photo by Richard Kelly) Michael Novara , originally from New York City, is a Pittsburgh attorney. He studies photography at Pittsburgh Filmmakers, is a member of the Pittsburgh Society of Artists and AgWorks , a photographic artist’s collective. He is interested in documentary photography, and his work has been shown at a number of Pittsburgh galleries and at the Silver Eye Center for Photography. His photographs of a local Amish community will be on exhibit at the Hoyt Institute of Fine Arts in New Castle, Pa., in July 2014. This story is part of the series: Under the Keystone We have an idea that a series of photos and videos of Pennsylvania people might actually help bring the state together and help readers understand what a variety of enthralling and disparate personalities live here. Read more about the project >> Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Overlooked communities