Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts “Citizen Koch” by Alexandra Kanik July 11, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X For information on theaters and locations, visit the Pittsburgh Filmmakers website . In 2010, a Supreme Court decision lifted a century-long ban on restricted corporate election spending, unleashing a new era of unbridled special interest campaign finance. This film offers a fascinating look at the growing struggle between money and democracy. One example: A Louisiana governor watched his Republican presidential campaign fizzle after he refused donations of more than a 100 dollars. He was outspent and drowned out by Super PAC – funded opponents. Combining intimate scenes with a bigger picture exposé, “Citizen Koch” penetrates a core issue of our time – who really holds the power in America? (Carl Deal, Tia Lessin; USA; 2013; 100 min) *PublicSource editor Sharon Walsh and reporter Eric Holmberg will introduce the film “Citizen Koch” on Sunday, July 13 at 3:00 pm and Thursday, July 17, at 7:30 pm. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.