Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan January 15, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Over the past several years, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. NTSB most-wanted list Each year, the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) compiles a list of things they believe the transportation sector needs to do to improve safety. This year, the NTSB stressed the importance of getting Positive Train Control (PTC)  implemented as soon as possible, despite a three-year extension Congress gave to the railroad industry. The technology automatically stops or slows trains before certain types of accidents occur and could have prevented a number of railroad disasters, including the tragic May 2015 Amtrak derailment in Philadelphia that killed eight people. Crude-by-rail shipments are way down Federal data shows shipments of crude oil declined by more than a fifth from January to October 2015. That’s partly due to coastal refineries buying more foreign oil as the production (and price) of domestic crude oil has fallen off. Quiet rail yards A rail yard owner in Wyoming talks about how the reduction in crude oil shipments by train has affected his business. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Crude oil trains as a potential terrorism threat A Virginia railroad safety task force report focuses on steps the state can take to reduce the risk of potential terrorist incidents involving trains transporting hazardous materials, including crude oil. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org or 412-315-0261. Follow her on Twitter @khantasha . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan