Posted in Aftermath: Synagogue attack , PUBLIC SAFETY , VIDEO Video: The Squirrel Hill florist working tirelessly to memorialize the victims from Tree of Life, her synagogue. by Kat Procyk October 29, 2018 December 10, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Ronna Wedner Levin works on a wreath for the victims of the Tree of Life synagogue shooting at her Squirrel Hill Flower Shop. Levin has attended the synagogue her entire life. (Photo by Kat Procyk/PublicSource) In the blocks surrounding the Tree of Life synagogue, residents can be found consoling one another and offering expressions of love and support in the form of flowers and cards. Many of the flowers left at the memorials following Saturday’s shooting are flowers crafted by the florists at the nearly 80-year-old Squirrel Hill Flower Shop. Ronna Wedner Levin has been running the shop on Murray Avenue since her father passed about 40 years ago. The shop’s phone has been ringing with calls from around the country for flowers in response to the shooting at the Tree of Life Synagogue — where Levin has worshipped her entire life. Donate to support more stories like this one. F lorist Vikory Ohmer, 69, said the community’s pain is still “very visceral.” “People are grieving, but everyone is so determined to show the world that they’re not afraid to live.” “They were innocents,” Ohmer added, referring to the victims. “They were all family in some way.” Vikory isn’t Jewish, but said “being around, they have taught me so much about the community.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting In the flower shop’s window, signs are placed that read “You Belong” and Hebrew phrases wishing for peace and healing. To heal, “it will take time,” Ohmer said. Kat Procyk can be reached at kat@publicsource.org . PublicSource community correspondent Jourdan Hicks contributed to this report. She can be reached at jourdan@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Florist , Judaism , Pittsburgh , Shooting , Squirrel Hill , Synagogue , Tree of Life , Video