Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts Gov. Corbett signs $29.1 billion budget, cuts $72.4 million in spending by Alexandra Kanik July 10, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Gov. Tom Corbett signed a $29.1 billion budget for the 2014-15 fiscal year while cutting the legislature’s budget by $65 million. The governor also cut an additional $7.4 million in spending. The governor said he made the reductions because the General Assembly increased its own budget while the state faces a massive deficit, according to our news partner, The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. From the Post-Gazette’s story : “They filled the budget with discretionary spending and then refused to deal with the biggest fiscal challenge facing Pennsylvania: our unsustainable public pension system,” Mr. Corbett said. “For these reasons I am forcing mutual sacrifice with the General Assembly through the governor’s ability to line-item veto and hold spending in budgetary reserve.” At the governor’s press conference, he incorrectly said that he trimmed an additional $7.2 million. However, the budget reported the cuts at $7.4 million. The governor reserved one of the biggest percentage cuts for the Speaker’s Office. The governor cut 75 percent of the Speaker’s budget, leaving the office with $473,000 of the $1.76 million originally budgeted. The governor said in his press conference today that he expects these cuts to be made up with General Assembly reserves. Locally, the Pittsburgh Intergovernmental Cooperation Authority was one of the cuts from Corbett’s line-item vetoes today. Corbett cut the Pittsburgh ICA’s budget from $550,000 to $250,000. Even with the cut, its budget will still be larger than last year’s $228,000 budget. It is the first budget increase for the ICA since the 2007-’08 fiscal year. The ICA has not received the funding it requested from the state in each of the past six years. The ICA is one of two governmental bodies that oversees the city’s finances as part of the Act 47 process, which PublicSource covered recently . Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Economy