Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts New Massachusetts campaign finance law reveals top PAC donors by Natasha Khan August 7, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Massachusetts just made it a lot easier to find out who is donating the most money to super PACs involved in statewide races. A new disclosure law requires outside political groups, such as super PACs, to display their five largest contributors who donated more than $5,000 in television, radio, internet and newspaper ads. Super PACs, the common term for independent expenditure-only committees, can raise unlimited amounts of money from corporations, individuals or labor unions. Signed by Gov. Deval Patrick on Aug. 1, Massachusetts House Bill 4366 also requires groups to report independent expenditures within seven days normally and within 24 hours if it’s 10 days or fewer before the election. They are called independent expenditures because it’s money spent on behalf of a candidate, but made without consulting that candidate’s campaign. Independent expenditures aren’t always TV ads, but can include catering for a fundraiser and T-shirts or mailings that support a candidate. The law also raised the maximum an individual can give to a candidate from $500 to $1,000 in a year. At $500, Massachusetts had one of the lowest individual giving limits in the country. Common Cause, a liberal nonprofit advocacy organization, drafted the original language for the bill four years ago, according to The Herald News . The new disclosure rules have already begun to have an effect on the governor’s race. One of the first ads the new law applied to was by Mass Forward Independent Expenditure PAC, a PAC that supports Democratic gubernatorial candidate Steve Grossman. The disclosure in the ad showed that his mother, Shirley Grossman, was one of the PAC’s top contributors. A recent positive ad for Republican frontrunner Charlie Baker from the Commonwealth Future Independent Expenditure PAC listed some prominent national donors, according to The Boston Globe : According to the list in the new spot, one of the backers is Beth Myers, who was [Mitt] Romney’s chief of staff when he was governor and a top aide during both of his presidential bids, a spokeswoman for the PAC confirmed. According to the ad, the other top donors are Chris Collins, Lisa Collins, Kelly O’Neill, and the Republican Governors Association, a national, well-financed group focused on electing GOP candidates as governors. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan