Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts Wolf’s new political action committee ‘Rebuild Pennsylvania’ by Eric Holmberg June 24, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Gov. Tom Wolf Gov. Tom Wolf has a new political action committee named “ Rebuild Pennsylvania ” that will be another avenue to advance his agenda and support other candidates, as first reported by The Philadelphia Inquirer . Western Pennsylvania political consultant Mike Mikus will lead the organization, according to the story. Mikus was the campaign manager for Katie McGinty’s unsuccessful run for governor last year and managed Rich Fitzgerald’s successful run for Allegheny County Executive in 2011. York Mayor C. Kim Bracey is the committee’s chairwoman and Kimberly Coleman is the treasurer, who was previously listed on Tom Wolf for Governor registration documents. After losing to Wolf in the primary, McGinty, who is now Wolf’s chief of staff, led the Campaign for a Fresh Start political action committee during the general election. According to the story : Wolf took the high road on the way to defeating Corbett while his Fresh Start PAC hounded the incumbent in a classic good cop/bad cop routine. Fresh Start raised about $350,000 last year and had about $10,000 left in its bank account at the end of 2014. Some of Fresh Start’s largest contributions came from Wolf’s campaign committee, McGinty’s campaign committee, labor unions and the Democratic Governors Association. McGinty said Wolf’s PAC last year helped to “amplify a message” in the campaign. It looks as if he plans to once again turn up the volume. Wolf contributed $10 million to his own campaign in 2013 to fund his competitive primary victory. He will jump-start Rebuild Pennsylvania with a personal check, according to the story . The committee is affiliated with Tom Wolf’s campaign committee and the registration statement was filled out in April, according to the paperwork filed with the Pennsylvania Department of State. Some of the prominent races in the state this year are for Pennsylvania Supreme Court, Pennsylvania Superior Court, Pennsylvania Commonwealth Court and a variety of municipal elections. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @holmberges . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Campaign finance