Posted in Inside our Newsroom Public Source seeks champions for local news that strengthens democracy by Alyia Paulding September 24, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Public Source staff, Thursday, May 22, 2025, at the Museum Lab on the North Side. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/Public Source) In a time of increasing threats to press freedom, the best protection any newsroom can have is the support of its community. We’re proud to produce journalism that makes a difference in our region, including work that was selected as one of the three best examples of impactful democracy-focused content in the country by the organizers of Democracy Day. Our stories and resources are fact-checked, timely — and only possible because of the contributions of readers like yourself. That’s why we’re excited to share a limited-time opportunity for you to double your donation — and be a champion for our nonprofit newsroom — by becoming a match pool donor for our upcoming campaign. Generous individuals and foundations have already pledged over $32,000 to this year’s match pool, and we need to secure an additional $18,000 in pledges to meet our goals. Why do we have a match pool? Donors really love to give when their support is matched. We’ve seen matched campaigns raise 10 times as much as unmatched campaigns. That’s a big difference for a newsroom of our size! How does it work? Now through Oct. 31: People make or pledge gifts to the match pool. Typical gifts to the match pool are between $250 and $5,000, but we’d be glad to have your support at any amount. Nov. 1-Dec. 31: We let our community of readers and supporters know about the opportunity to get their gifts matched. (Trust us, they’ll be excited!) The funds from the match pool inspire readers to donate, helping every dollar go further. We’ve fulfilled every match pool pledge we’ve gotten in the past, but if we were to fall short, match pool donors have the opportunity to revoke their pledges, so these funds are “use it or lose it.” Ready to participate now? You can make your match pool gift by clicking here or using the button below. (Make sure to use the link or button, so that we know your gift is intended for the match pool!) Donate to the match pool now Want to participate, but not ready to give today? No problem — complete our quick match pledge form by clicking this link or using the button below, and make your payment later. Pledge a match gift now Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Have questions? I’m all ears. Reach out to me at alyia@publicsource.org . Every match pool gift will help us meet our budget goals and keep delivering important information for our neighbors. On behalf of our entire newsroom, thanks for your consideration! Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow Alyia Paulding alyia@publicsource.org Alyia (they/she) is the Director of Membership and Development at PublicSource, working to establish and nurture relationships with donors and funders. Before joining PublicSource in 2020, Alyia worked... More by Alyia Paulding