Posted in Coming Home PA , IN-DEPTH VA to hire more mental health workers by Erika Beras July 2, 2012 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X In the next few months, VA Pittsburgh Healthcare system will be hiring approximately 42 new mental healthcare workers. The VA will be bringing on clinicians and support staff to assist the ever-growing number of veterans who seek and require mental health help. Jeffrey Peters is the Associate Chief of Staff for Behavioral Health at VA Pittsburgh’s Healthcare System. He said more veterans seek mental health care not because there is a higher incidence or prevalence than in years past, but because the stigma surrounding such care has decreased. He said the providers they seek have to have a better understanding of the care veterans require. “Oftentimes in someone’s life, the time they have spent in the service is a very important part of their identity. It could be a source of pride, it could have been a time of terrible, difficult things, but if you don’t have an appreciation for that life experience then I think you’re less likely to be useful as a mental health provider in VA,” he said. VA Pittsburgh already has 240 clinicians providing behavioral health services. This is part of a national effort to bulk up mental health services for veterans. Approximately 1,900 new workers will be hired nationwide. View this story on the Essential Public Radio website here. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Veterans affairs