Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan November 6, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Sen. Casey asks railroads to slow trains through big cities U.S. Sen. Bob Casey (D-Pa.) asked CSX and Norfolk Southern railroads to slow oil trains down to 35 mph through cities with populations of 100,000 or more. Gov. Tom Wolf previously proposed the same speed reduction. Crude oil trains also move through midsize cities, including Harrisburg, Altoona and Reading, which all have populations under 100,000. East Coast refinery looks elsewhere for crude oil As the North Dakota oil boom slows due to a dip in oil prices a Delaware oil refinery is looking to source crude oil from overseas. New York moms protest oil trains A group of mothers in Rochester are fearful of oil trains coming through their area because of deteriorating tracks and infrastructure, lack of government oversight and trains moving too fast through communities. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Heat caused two oil trains to derail in Montana BNSF Railway said two July derailments on their tracks in Montana happened after heat caused rails to come out of alignment. Both accidents resulted in spills and caused $3 million in combined damages. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org or 412-315-0261. Follow her on Twitter @khantasha . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan