Her Story Why don’t more students at Pittsburgh’s Gifted Center look like me? Donise Griffin, age 13, East Hills of Pittsburgh March 16, 2017 Donise Griffin, 13, sees racial inequity when she leaves Colfax K-8 for the Pittsburgh Gifted Center. (Photo by Guy Wathen/PublicSource) My name is Donise Griffin. I am a 13-year-old seventh grader at Pittsburgh Colfax K-8. I have attended the Pittsburgh Gifted Center since the middle of my sixth-grade year. I am very artistic and creative. I like anything that I can get my hands on. I love to read and write because both let your imagination run wild, opening up doors that may not be possible in the real world. I also love math because I love to be proven right. I’ve never had a bad view on learning. The gifted center has given me extra opportunities, so I can further understand what I can do with my life after school. I’m now thinking about becoming an architect because I could make my ideas come to life, and I can even use math to prove that my designs are stable. What I don’t like about the gifted center is that there aren’t many students who look like me. The range of students is not all that different. True, there are other races and ethnicities, but there’s not that many. The majority of the students are white. I am the only black student in the seventh grade who goes to the gifted center from my school. TraOnna Malloy (left), 14, and Donise Griffin, 13, are both considered “gifted” by Pittsburgh Public Schools. Few of the district’s black girls have that same opportunity. (Photo by Guy Wathen/PublicSource) Now I don’t know about the other schools, but it is noticeable when there is only one black female in each of the sixth, seventh and eighth grades in the lunchroom. And yes, I feel out of place! It’s kind of weird how there are no black males who go to the gifted center. I know some who got tested, but why is there not one? There may have been some in the past, but there sure are not any now — at least that’s what I see. I also really hate how when I feel like I’m fitting in or trying to be normal around the other kids, racist or sexist things always come out. Just because I am a lighter shade of brown, they forget that I am a black female, or, even worse, point it out. They say things like “not to be racist,” “even though you’re a girl” or “no offense.” So I’m supposed to be like, “OK, you get a racist pass; you get a sexist pass.” NO! It still means what it means. The teachers don’t treat me different, but the feeling is still there. Lastly, I think all parents should know about the Pittsburgh Gifted Center, not just the ones who request testing. Many parents don’t know. If they did, our whole society would likely become more advanced. I do believe gifted is a wonderful program, but I wish it could be more widely spread to all different kinds of students in the school  — and maybe even enforced, if it was up to me. Donise Griffin is in seventh grade at Pittsburgh Colfax K-8. She is interested in science and has attended programs at Carnegie Mellon University. She has gone to multiple classes for crafts and drawing. She has played basketball and softball, even though she doesn’t think she is good at either. Their Stories Tyneisha continues quest to prove herself as a parent with a disability, but she could still lose her son ‘Young Black Pittsburgh’ ambassadors connect with the girls who shared their stories through letters The vicious cycle inside Allegheny County juvenile court for black girls and their mothers. I saw it up close. Tiara Tabb: In this black-or-white world, I want to find the gray area Jayla Wright: Relationships can tear you down and lift you up. 360 Video: Priya is a teen roboticist interested in how robots can revolutionize medicine Tyneisha thinks her disability shouldn’t disqualify her from motherhood Being 16: Janae turns to poetry to make art out of struggle Shaunese Johnson: Schools teach the same black history over and over. Students deserve better. Pittsburgh has a severe shortage of black teachers and that’s hurting black students. Tamia Law: Living in Clairton: ‘Nobody really cares unless it is football’ Getting in the game: Physical activity is a win-win for black girls Pittsburgh’s black girls face lots of inequity barriers. Advocates want tangible change. Corrine Jasmin: They say I’m pretty — for a black girl. Dezmaire gave birth in eighth grade. As a teen mom in Pittsburgh, she’s fighting to beat the odds and graduate. Maia Ervin: I am black, I am a student, and I’m tired of racism on my campus Zoe Vongtau: ‘I hid my accent and culture. I was just always the new black girl.’ She lost her mom and her home. How Monet is finding a promising future in Pittsburgh. 11-year-old Keliyah wants to be a lawyer, sings a special song If everyone got screened, gifted education in Pittsburgh could be more equitable. School officials aren’t sold. When some students are labeled as gifted, I see the harm done to those left behind Who gets to be considered ‘gifted’ in Pittsburgh schools?  Too few black girls. Videos: Six women speak about the outlook for black girls in Pittsburgh Do black girls pay a higher price when comprehensive sex education isn’t taught? Amariah Woodson: Racism can be difficult to prove, but I think it happened to me Sienna Rodriguez-Truley: The parts of me that can’t be mixed and matched There are ways to end the school-to-prison pipeline Relive the Gwen’s Girls Equity Summit through what was discussed on social media Gwen’s Girls summit highlights how suspensions derail black girls’ education A story of two girls: Why being black means more scrutiny and punishment in Pittsburgh schools How institutions and society fail Pittsburgh’s black girls