Posted in Inside our Newsroom 50+ stories later, here’s what we’ve done. We’ve got the receipts. Now we need your support. by Alyia Paulding November 1, 2024 November 5, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Since January of this year, we’ve published more than 50 pieces about elections in our area — how they work, how to participate, what’s motivating local voters and much more. We’ve tracked down dark money behind political campaigns. We’ve challenged misinformation and investigated whether the claims in candidates’ ads are true. As presidential candidates make repeated visits to the region, trying to lock down swing state voters, we’ve relentlessly focused on finding the truth amid the noise and elevating the voices of our community. Our entire editorial team has contributed to this content, showing how the issues at stake in the election intersect with your daily life — from your health to your pocketbook. Every story is fact-checked. Every story includes a variety of voices. Every story is produced by people who live here and care deeply about our region. Every story supports democracy, from the local level on up. And every story is made possible by support from readers like you. Trustworthy, verified sources of information are critical — but they can’t exist without support from the community. Please show that you value our independent, nonpartisan, in-depth reporting by making a gift today. Your one-time donation will be doubled, and your new monthly gift will be matched x12. Thank you in advance for supporting our journalism. Give now Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , election , election 2024 , election denial , misinformation , Pennsylvania , Pittsburgh Alyia Paulding alyia@publicsource.org Alyia (they/she) is the Director of Membership and Development at PublicSource, working to establish and nurture relationships with donors and funders. Before joining PublicSource in 2020, Alyia worked... More by Alyia Paulding