Posted in Climate Shell’s new plant will ‘just run and run,’ producing raw materials for plastics In company emails, Shell executives admit “we do have questions to answer” about the plastic waste the company’s new plant will produce over its 30-year lifespan. by James Bruggers, Inside Climate News December 29, 2022 December 29, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Shell's new ethane cracker plant photographed from across the river in Vanport on Oct. 31. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) Internal documents unearthed by congressional Democrats reveal an apparent moment of candor two years ago from Shell public relations executives discussing their company’s environmental responsibilities related to the massive plastics manufacturing plant they were building 30 miles northwest of Pittsburgh. The multi-billion dollar Shell plant became fully operational in November after years of construction and has already been cited by state environmental regulators for exceeding its yearly limit of volatile organic compounds, which create lung-damaging smog. The plant along the Ohio River in Beaver County has the capacity to produce annually as much as 3.5 billion pounds of plastic pellets, the building blocks for such products as bags, bottles, food packaging and toys. The documents made public this month included email correspondence within the Shell communications team, in which a corporate vice president acknowledged that the company had no answer to questions about its long-term responsibility for making “the raw material with which to produce 30 years of single-use plastics.” James Cato, of the Mountain Watershed Association, holds a plastic nurdle found at the Shell cracker plant’s outfall between a pair of forceps on Oct. 27. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) The Shell executive’s comment came in the context of criticizing a 2020 New York Times article with a provocative headline: “Big Oil Is in Trouble. It’s Plan: Flood Africa With Plastic.” The Times report noted that oil companies were shifting to plastics production as climate change threatened fossil fuels, and revealed an effort by the American Chemistry Council, a major petrochemical lobby, to promote pro-plastics U.S. trade policies in Africa. “Frankly, we do have questions to answer about whether we’re going to take any responsibility for where PennChem’s output ends up,” a corporate communications vice president, Rob Sherwin, wrote to another top Shell communications official, Curtis Smith, on Sept. 1, 2020. “This is one that’s gonna run and run … because we haven’t even finished building a facility that will potentially churn out the raw material with which to produce single use plastic for 30 years.” Another Shell official in the company’s communications shop, Sally Donaldson, chimed in that this was “definitely a topic we need to be on top of.” The Beaver County plant was previously referred to as the Pennsylvania Chemicals project, according to Shell’s website. The Shell emails were among a trove of documents from oil companies including ExxonMobil, Chevron and BP made public by the House Committee on Oversight and Reform as part of an investigation into the fossil fuel industry and its role in driving climate change. Shell officials did not respond to requests for comment. In recent years, companies have increasingly been pressured into taking responsibility for the plastic waste they produce, or the environmental damage they cause. In 2020, for example, Shell announced it would strive to achieve net-zero carbon emissions and that it had joined a global alliance of companies working to end plastic waste. But the global plastics problem has turned into a crisis, with oceans choked with plastic and microplastics ubiquitous, and the United Nations looking for a solution. In Western Pennsylvania, the company’s plant — fed by the ethane byproduct of fracked natural gas from the Marcellus and Utica shale regions — has been seen by business advocates as a potential center for a new Appalachian petrochemical hub , and by critics as a source of health-damaging pollution and a driver of climate change. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Environmental advocates in Pennsylvania described the email comments from the Shell officials as both alarming and revelatory. “The Shell internal email appears to confirm our suspicions that we have raised about the Shell plant in Beaver County,” said Matt Mehalik, executive director of the Breathe Collaborative, a coalition of citizens, environmental advocates, health professionals and academics working to improve air quality in the Pittsburgh region. Shell’s new ethane cracker plant sits along the southern shore of the Ohio River in Potter Township on Oct. 25. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) “The Beaver plastic resins plant will produce a lot of single-use plastics over the course of 30 years,” Mehalik said. “The tone of the email suggests that even Shell employees know that this is a problem.” The Pittsburgh region’s public image is at stake, he said. “Damaging the world for 30 years is not the story that people in our region will be proud of, but that seems to be where things are headed,” Mehalik said. Shell, he said, “should be held accountable.” Terrie Baumgardner, Beaver County outreach coordinator for the Pennsylvania-based Clean Air Council, said the emails made her feel “like a time-traveling fly on the wall. “Setting aside the plant’s health impacts, when it comes to plastics pollution, I’d like to think I hear a tiny note of against-the-grain courage and even concern in Rob Sherwin’s two sentences of candor,” Baumgardner said. “But I’m also appalled to hear him acknowledge, in this casual context, the likelihood that 30 years of single-use plastics production at the Beaver County plant is gonna ‘run and run’ with zero corporate accountability for the global scourge of waste the plant’s output will create.” This article originally appeared on Inside Climate News , a nonprofit, independent news organization that covers climate, energy and the environment. It is republished with permission. Sign up for their newsletter here . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Beaver County , Cracker Plant , Shell