Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 23, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 23, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pennsylvania Pittsburgh: Could Pittsburgh passengers see fewer layovers? The Allegheny County Airport Authority is looking at more nonstop flights to the West Coast and Europe for Pittsburgh travelers. Although Pittsburgh International Airport already has direct flights to San Francisco, Los Angeles and seasonal flights to Paris, they hope to expand this service and convince California cities and Seattle to provide more nonstop flights to Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh: The mold crisis continues… A Pittsburgh law firm is investigating the deaths of two more UPMC patients who possibly died from the hospital’s mold outbreak after contracting infections following transplants. They also represent a man recovering from an infection. Pittsburgh: Vacant lots may bloom City Council approved a bill Wednesday that would create the Adopt-A-Lot program for Pittsburgh’s 9,500 vacant lots, allowing people to cultivate flower or food gardens and relieve blight. Lancaster County: A study to determine future of police department The state Department of Community and Economic Development is conducting a study about possibly consolidating police forces in neighboring communities in a Lancaster County borough. It will look at call-volume, costs and staffing to determine whether the decision would be beneficial. Harrisburg: Kane fights back Attorney General Kathleen Kane on Thursday released the personal emails of Supreme Court Justice J. Michael Eakin. They surfaced in office emails last year revealing crude language and nude photos. Kane’s counterattack stems from claims that Eakin’s conduct was overlooked by the high court and the Judicial Conduct Board as only ‘mildly pornographic.’ National U.S. soldier dies in rescue of hostages One U.S. soldier died in an operation that rescued about 70 hostages who faced execution in Iraq, according to the Pentagon. This was the first time U.S. forces engaged in combat with ISIS in Iraq, and the soldier was the first American to die in combat there since 2011. FCC cuts cost of prison phone calls The cost of a phone call in prison can cost as much as $14 a minute, but the Federal Communications Commission took action and limited, and in some cases eliminated, fees by phone service providers. The new rules will affect federal and state prisons, local jails and immigrant detention centers. Secret Service found sleeping on the job After two Secret Service men were found sleeping at their posts , the Inspector General of the department sent the agency a formal warning about the security risks of overworking employees. Benghazi hearing Hillary Clinton testified before the House Select Committee on Benghazi Thursday, urging Republican critics on the committee to “reach for statesmanship” in their inquiry into the attacks that killed four Americans in 2012. Clinton was not the only one in the spotlight. Controversy occurred when Rep. Elijah Cummings (D-Md.) accused Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.), chairman of the committee, of selectively releasing emails to make Clinton look bad. In Other News Millennial-old viking sword discovered A man in Norway stumbled upon a 1,200-year-old viking sword while on a hike. The mountains are usually covered with snow or frost for at least six months, keeping the weapon out of humidity and contributing to its surprisingly good condition. The Daily Report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can contact her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI