Posted in COVID-19 Four tips to follow when maskless people make you anxious, according to a trauma therapist by First-person essay by Casey Swartz August 10, 2020 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Casey Swartz, a certified trauma therapist in private practice, says that while we can’t control other people, we can control how we react and how we advocate for ourselves. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Compelling personal stories told by the people living them. On the list of public health recommendations known to help stem the global coronavirus pandemic, mask-wearing and social distancing are at the top. Unfortunately, complying with these basic public health measures has become politicized, leading some folks to refuse to do either or both. Others may have reasons we can’t immediately see for not following public health protocol. We can’t always know what motivates others. We can change how we react and how we advocate for ourselves and our needs. When we see folks not wearing masks or participating in social distancing, many of us find ourselves in uncomfortable and anxiety-filled quandaries. The intensity of reactions generally increases if you or someone with whom you’re in contact has an underlying medical condition that makes them more vulnerable to COVID-19. As a trauma therapist, I’ve helped many of my clients identify and then find ways to address the often paralyzing anxiety that can make advocating for things like public health measures difficult. Too many of us aren’t taught self-advocacy skills. This is especially true for girls and women. Instead, being polite and kind have been ingrained as highly valuable skills for children to develop (and as a mom of three myself, I don’t disagree!). But, we sometimes fail to also teach kids — especially girls — that standing up for themselves and others is just as important as being kind or polite. Without the skills to self-advocate and stand up for others, people gravitate toward passive aggressive or full-on aggressive ways of expressing displeasure and discomfort. Think nasty comments under your breath, vague but mean social media posts or public shaming. The reaction to those who refuse to wear masks is the perfect example of a society that lacks the skills to change public behavior in both micro and macro ways. The anxiety we’re all living with can put our defense mechanisms on overdrive, creating barriers to communicating respectfully and peacefully with one another. Folks with a history of physical or emotional trauma often find themselves facing even more barriers to calm, productive conversations out of fear that asking a stranger to put on a mask or move away could quickly escalate and become unmanageable. While there is no one solution, there are a few considerations I’d encourage people to make when it comes to addressing mask use (or lack thereof) in public spaces: Take control of what you can This global pandemic has created a constant sense of uncertainty and lack of control for us all. At bare minimum, you have the control to decide if you want to be in a public space or not. It may feel extreme to leave a full cart at the grocery store or or walk out of a pharmacy without your medication, but if the risk appears greater than the inconvenience, be intentional about your ability to take action and make a decision that feels best for you. Many folks also have the privilege to decide where to spend our money. If a store, doctor’s office or restaurant doesn’t seem to be making your health a priority, explore other options you can feel good about. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “The reaction to those who refuse to wear masks is the perfect example of a society that lacks the skills to change public behavior in both micro and macro ways,” writes Casey Swartz, a certified trauma therapist in private practice. “The anxiety we’re all living with can put our defense mechanisms on overdrive, creating barriers to communicating respectfully and peacefully with one another.” (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Check yourself It’s understandable to feel anxious or angry when we see someone not taking basic safety measures. But it’s important to remember that even if we feel really sure we know what is motivating a stranger’s decision, we’re really just making an assumption. The maskless person who just walked by may have their own physical or mental health issues that we cannot see. Remind yourself that some people, especially Black men, have reason to fear covering their faces in public. Wearing a mask could expose them to racial profiling and police harassment — or worse. Communicate your concerns You can take control over how you want to communicate. Do you want to ask the person directly if they would put on a mask or move farther away? Do you want to express concern to the store owner/manager? Would you feel better making a phone call or sending an email than having an in-person conversation? You get to choose what is right for you. Communicate your concerns effectively If the awkwardness of direct confrontation is your concern, then focus on communicating your needs. Rather than confronting a stranger with anger or shame, use those social niceties that were drilled into us. Try approaching gently with something like, “Hi there, I’m practicing social distancing. Could you help me with that by backing up just a bit?” If advocating for yourself feels foreign, then create some talking points. Have two to three “canned responses” to use when you need to request that someone put on a mask before engaging with you. Practice using those responses so that if/when you need them, you feel more comfortable. Remember, we can’t control other people, but we can control ourselves. You deserve to feel physically and emotionally safe. An argument with a stranger, staying in a space that doesn’t feel safe or not advocating for your needs won’t help you achieve that sense of safety. So prior to being in a difficult situation, think about how you’d like to handle it. You’ll be more likely to respond rather than react and feel better about it as a result. Casey Swartz is a certified trauma therapist in private practice. She can be reached at casey@caseyswartz.com. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram