Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts Philanthropist donates millions to psychiatric research by Molly Duerig July 24, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Ted Stanley, whose son struggled with bipolar disorder, this week gave $650 million to the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard to do research on the genetics of mental illness, according to WBUR Boston. It was the largest gift ever received for psychiatric research. Stanley, 83, founded The Danbury Mint, which originally sold commemorative medals. He came to understand the importance of psychiatric treatment after witnessing his son Jonathan’s battle with bipolar disorder when he was 19. Jonathan responded well to treatment, but Stanley knows many people with similar disorders are not so fortunate. When he announced the gift, Broad’s founder and chairman Eric Lander referred to a new scientific paper published in the journal Nature that found over 100 sites in the human genome that appear to be linked to schizophrenia. Broad researchers contributed to the study. From WBUR, Boston’s NPR station: Institute founding director Eric Lander wants to begin using Ted Stanley’s money to catalog all the genetic variations that contribute to severe psychiatric disorders. He said the Broad Institute has already collected the DNA from 116,000 psychiatric patients. “Once you have the specific genes,” Lander said, “you can then accelerate the biological study of how they function together in pathways. That’s the really important step, and that’s the key next step.” Large-scale, systematic scientific research is difficult to do when you don’t know when more grant money will come through. Stanley’s son responded well to lithium when he was diagnosed with bipolar disorder with psychosis. He went on to college and law school and told WBUR that he approves of his father’s decision to use his fortune in that way. Reach Molly Duerig at 724-799-4098 or at mollyduerig@gmail.com. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Molly Duerig _migrated-863-author/molly-duerig@example.com Molly Duerig is a freelance videographer. She collaborates with PublicSource reporters, creating visual content to accompany their stories. Molly has degrees in English and Spanish from Allegheny... More by Molly Duerig