Posted in Local Government Pittsburgh mayoral campaigns spent big on ads and paid hundreds of thousands to out-of-state firms Peduto spent more than $300,000 on TV ads and more than $100,000 on ‘research.’ Outside PACs added more than $180,000 to the mix. by Charlie Wolfson May 17, 2021 May 17, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Mayor Bill Peduto and state Rep. Ed Gainey, the top two candidates for mayor of Pittsburgh in Tuesday’s Democratic primary, combined to raise more than $1.2 million between Jan. 1 and May 3 this year. Campaign finance reports show that Peduto focused spending on TV advertising while Gainey focused on mailers, signs and other advertising. The total spending numbers roughly mirror the fundraising totals for this campaign cycle: the incumbent Peduto outraised the challenger Gainey, about $900,000 to $306,000, and Peduto outspent Gainey $878,142 to $241,954. The two campaigns used different strategies to deploy campaign funds over the last five months. The Peduto campaign spent almost $340,000 on advertising — about 39% of all spending, covering the city with print, digital and TV ads. More than $300,000 of this went to TV ads. The Gainey campaign spent more than $55,000 on sending mail to voters, more than 22% of its total spending. The Peduto campaign listed several expenditures as “research” on its report, totaling $109,224. More than $102,000 of that sum went to a Washington, D.C.-based firm called Lake Research Partners, which describes itself as a “national public opinion and political strategy research firm.” The Gainey campaign paid $21,000 to another D.C.-based firm, Greenburg Quinlan Rosner, which focuses on helping progressive candidates. Despite the large disparity in total spending, the two campaigns spent almost the same amount on mail. The Gainey campaign spent $55,281, or 22.85% of its total, and the Peduto campaign spent $57,045, or just 6.49% of its total. The Peduto campaign got a head start. It started out with more than $180,000 on hand from 2020, while the Gainey campaign had just $2,600 from before this year. Unsurprisingly, the Peduto campaign outspent the Gainey campaign more than five to one in January. The Gainey campaign didn’t spend more than $10,000 in any two-week period until early March, and the Peduto campaign shifted into high gear in late March and April. The mayor’s campaign spent more than $262,000 in the first half of April alone. The money spent by each candidate’s official campaign does not encompass all of the spending around this race. Political action committees, or PACs, are independently spending significant sums on both candidates. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting More than $1 million has gone into Pittsburgh’s mayoral race. Where did it come from? Good Jobs Pittsburgh, a labor union-backed PAC that is supporting Peduto, paid $134,905 to a Brooklyn-based political consulting firm. Pittsburgh Justice for All, a pro-Gainey PAC funded largely by healthcare worker unions, raised more than $400,000 since Jan. 1 and reported a payment of nearly $50,000 to a D.C.-based communications firm. The single vendor that received the most from the Peduto campaign was Buying Time, LLC, a company that handles TV ad purchases. Peduto spent more than $315,000 on TV ads through the company. Gainey’s largest bill was for more than $90,000 to Berlin Rosen, a New York-based communications firm that handled a lot of the campaign’s printing, mailing and advertising. The Peduto campaign spent more than $1,300 on food. The most frequent stop was Cappy’s Cafe in Shadyside, but the largest single bill was a $523 order at Jimmy John’s. The Gainey team spent just $176 on food, patronizing Domino’s Pizza, Dunkin’ Donuts and Starbucks. Charlie Wolfson is PublicSource’s local government reporter. He can be reached at charlie@publicsource.org or on Twitter @chwolfson . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Charlie Wolfson charlie@publicsource.org x Charlie Wolfson is an enterprise reporter for Pittsburgh's Public Source, focusing on local government accountability and politics in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. He was a Report for America corps... More by Charlie Wolfson