Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource announces leadership transition by Halle Stockton October 25, 2021 November 3, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The PublicSource Board of Directors is announcing the transition of Executive Director Mila Sanina . After five years, Mila has chosen to take time to focus on her well-being. The board thanks Mila for her exceptional, dedicated service to PublicSource. During her tenure, she led PublicSource’s growth from 5 to 13 employees, developed and grew its membership program and, most importantly, was responsible for an organization producing quality, public-service journalism that fostered a readership of Pittsburghers who care about their city and region. Mila has led PublicSource to numerous awards, including the national Online Journalism Award for General Excellence by a Micro Newsroom in both 2020 and 2021. “I am proud of how far PublicSource has come and immensely grateful to my stellar team, supportive board, our generous supporters, readers and the Pittsburgh community at large,” Mila said. “I am confident that this news organization is positioned to thrive and its essential work will live on. “It’s an incredibly difficult decision for me to depart but it’s time for me to move on and get well and find myself again outside of PublicSource. I’ll be around and will always support PublicSource, one of the best local newsrooms in America.” Mila’s departure will take place before the end of the year. She has laid the groundwork for the organization to continue operating during the transition. All editorial operations will continue to be led by Managing Editor Halle Stockton and business operations will continue under Director of Revenue and Operations Jennie Liska. The PublicSource board will lead a national leadership search for Mila’s successor. The Board of Directors welcomes questions from readers and can be reached at info@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton