Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts Who was helped most by Obamacare? by Eric Holmberg October 29, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X About 10 million people signed up for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. What we now know, according to a dataset mapped by The New York Times, is which counties saw the largest increases in insurance coverage. From the story : The areas with the largest increases in the health insurance rate, for example, include rural Arkansas and Nevada; southern Texas; large swaths of New Mexico, Kentucky and West Virginia; and much of inland California and Oregon. The effect is easy to see on the map. Counties in Arkansas now have a lower percentage of people uninsured than all of their neighboring states. In some West Virginia counties that border Pennsylvania, they cut their percent of uninsured residents in half. In Marshall County, West Virginia, 20 percent of residents didn’t have health insurance in 2013. A year later, only 11 percent didn’t have health insurance. The national percentage of people without health insurance fell from 16 percent in 2013 to 11 percent in 2014. The data shows that the law has done something rather unusual in the American economy this century: It has pushed back against inequality, essentially redistributing income — in the form of health insurance or insurance subsidies — to many of the groups that have fared poorly over the last few decades. People in rural areas were more likely to sign up for insurance and the program had a greater impact in counties that are, politically, solidly Republican, according to the story. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.