Posted in Daily report , posts Aug. 28, 2015 by PublicSource contributor August 28, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Overdose recovery drug poses difficulty For heroin and opioid overdoses, naloxone (or Narcan) is a powerful drug that can reverse the effects of overdoses and save lives. Friends and family of users can obtain the drug at pharmacies with prescriptions, and in some places without. But despite there being few legal obstacles, obtaining Narcan is still a problem ; only 14 pharmacies in Allegheny County carry it. Pittsburgh: The cost of living A new report by the Economic Policy Institute breaks down what families need to get by with a family budget calculator. In Pittsburgh, Sacramento and Austin, the average cost for a family of four to live decently is $5,400 a month . Housing in Pittsburgh is a lot more affordable than the other cities, but child care is significantly more expensive. Pittsburgh: Best places to work The annual survey named Pitt Ohio as the best large, Re/Max Realty Select as the best midsize and Select International as the best small workplaces in the region. Philadelphia: Bakery recalls potentially contaminated bread Bimbo Bakery, located in Horsham, PA, issued a voluntary recall Thursday after glass fragments were reportedly found in their breads. A lightbulb shattered in one of the facilities, which may have contaminated the products. Although 11 states are affected , PA is not among them. Harrisburg: The mentally ill in jail Jared Winters suffered from bipolar disorder for seven years before his parents sought to get him help in a group home. However, a five-month waiting list ended up spelling disaster for Winters; he was arrested and imprisoned for theft. He’s been in jail since May and is still waiting for an opening at a home, one of nearly 4,000 PA inmates who are seriously mentally ill. NATIONAL WBDJ7 internal memos Vester Flanagan, the suspected killer of two Virginia journalists, was reportedly told by his supervisors to seek medical help after several aggressive outbursts against co-workers at the station. The memos indicated that failure to do so would lead to his termination. Flanagan then sued the station over his dismissal. 10 years after Katrina On Aug. 29, 2005, four-fifths of New Orleans lay submerged beneath hurricane floodwater . About 1,400 people died there, and many of those who survived moved elsewhere. A decade later, the racial divide is still prevalent, but the faulty institutions from before the flood have been re-engineered by planners and federal dollars. Prep school rape case goes into deliberations The nine-person jury in the New Hampshire-based St. Paul’s School rape case entered deliberations on Thursday afternoon. The defendant, Owen Labrie, 19, faces three felonies and three other sexual assault charges. Prosecutors say he raped a 15-year-old girl two days before he graduated last year, as part of a senior hazing ritual. Pakistan to become third largest nuclear power A new report compiled by two American think tanks, the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and the Stimson Center, shows that Pakistan could build as many as 20 warheads a year and currently houses about 120. In the next decade, Pakistan will shoot past other rivals and have the third largest stockpile after the U.S. and Russia. IN OTHER NEWS Dismaland Bemusement Park A clear satirization of Disneyland (“the happiest place on earth”), Dismaland purports to be “ the U.K.’s most disappointing .” The derelict theme park is actually one massive art installation curated by U.K. street artist Banksy. The family-friendly park that’s “ unsuitable for children ” is open until the end of September in Weston-super-Mare. ‘Monumental error’ Parks and recreation workers in the Galicia region of Spain accidentally destroyed a 6,000-year-old Neolithic tomb because they thought the broken slabs were a busted picnic table. Some priceless history was destroyed, but now visitors have a functioning picnic spot . The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.