Posted in Pennsylvania Philadelphia transit agency will use project reserves to avoid cuts. Pittsburgh’s might do the same. Gov. Josh Shapiro and Democratic lawmakers had been unable to persuade enough Republican lawmakers to approve more transit aid to help fill deficits at transit agencies around Pennsylvania. by Marc Levy, Associated Press September 8, 2025 September 8, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X People attend a rally opposing potential Pittsburgh Regional Transit service cuts and fare increases, Tuesday, April 29, outside the David L. Lawrence Convention Center in Downtown. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) HARRISBURG (AP) — Gov. Josh Shapiro’s administration on Monday approved the use of hundreds of millions of dollars in capital project funding for Philadelphia’s public transit agency to help it restore bus, trolley and rail services that it had eliminated to shore up its deficit-riddled finances. The Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority [SEPTA] — one of the nation’s largest mass transit agencies with 800,000 daily riders — had made the request to comply with a judge’s order to undo the two-week-old cuts. A similar request is likely to come from the state’s next largest public transit agency, Pittsburgh Regional Transit [PRT]. PRT has been discussing a 35% service reduction to help close what it calls a roughly $100 million deficit this year. That could include eliminating 45 bus routes, reducing 54 others and eliminating one of three light rail lines. That deficit will grow each year without more aid, and shifting money for capital projects is only a stopgap measure and not a sustainable plan, PRT said. “Using capital funds for operations would only be a stopgap measure. Pennsylvania needs a long-term, reliable funding solution to provide the safe, reliable, and affordable service our communities depend on,” PRT said in a statement. SEPTA made the service reductions after Shapiro and Democratic lawmakers had been unable for the past two years to persuade enough Republican lawmakers to approve hundreds of millions more dollars in new transit aid to help fill deficits at transit agencies around the state. “I am taking this action … to support SEPTA, to make sure that these 800,000 Pennsylvanians and the millions who will visit our commonwealth have a trolley or a bus or a subway or a train to get around,” Shapiro told a news conference Monday. As a result of SEPTA’s cutbacks, schools in Philadelphia reported a big increase in late student arrivals and absenteeism in the just-begun school year, Shapiro said. Meanwhile, Philadelphia is helping host major tourist attractions next year, including FIFA World Cup matches and events surrounding the celebration of the nation’s 250th birthday. The struggles in the nation’s sixth-most populous city reflect similar dilemmas at major transit agencies around the U.S. as they navigate rising costs and lagging ridership after the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted commutes. SEPTA had described the cuts as more drastic than any undertaken by a major transit agency in the U.S. but necessary to deal with a deficit of more than $200 million. However, testimony in the court challenge described the cuts as being unnecessary and discriminatory toward poor and minority communities. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting SEPTA said that shifting $394 million in state-provided capital funds could restore services and avoid other planned cuts for the next two years. That’s about a year’s worth of funding it gets from the state for capital projects. The authority will still impose fare increases of 21.5% that it estimated will bring in $31 million a year. All told, SEPTA had warned that it will cut half its services by Jan. 1. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow