Posted in DATA , DEVELOP PGH , Economy & Housing , Equity , IN-DEPTH Some groups that pay disabled workers below minimum wage not complying with the law by Halle Stockton August 14, 2014 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The U.S. Department of Labor has ordered Pennsylvania organizations to pay $118,000 in back wages to workers with disabilities since 2011, according to records PublicSource obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request. At the heart of these investigations are people with intellectual and developmental disabilities, many of whom cannot advocate for themselves. The workers already were earning far below minimum wage because the employers have a special license to pay people with disabilities less. There is very little oversight on the state or national level of these employers, making it  impossible to know how widespread the pay issues are and whether they are accidental or intentional. Over nearly four years, the labor department has conducted only 29 investigations in the state, primarily of nonprofits that were granted a federal license to pay ‘special minimum wages’ to workers whose productivity is affected by a disability. There are currently 126 organizations in the state with the license. About 13,000 disabled Pennsylvanians earn an average of $2.40 an hour in these subminimum-wage work programs, according to a PublicSource analysis of federal labor documents. The audits resulted in orders for 17 organizations to pay back wages to 1,193 employees, including non-disabled employees in some cases. Two organizations — Growth Horizons in Bucks County, and Greene Arc in Greene County — were investigated twice in the time period. The inquiries were concluded after the groups agreed to pay back wages and promised future compliance. Click here to view a list of Pennsylvania groups ordered to pay back wages. The Greene Arc was ordered to pay more back wages than any other group, owing more than $40,000 after a 2013 investigation found that the nonprofit did not use the appropriate standard for setting wages for the workers. The investigation also found that Greene Arc was deducting the allowed 15-minute breaks from the employees’ overall hours worked. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Disabled workers at Greene Arc were earning an average of $3.59 an hour for shredding, food preparation, recycling and greenhouse work, according to its 2012-14 application. Cynthia Dias, executive director of Greene Arc, said she could not comment on the findings of the investigation because she was traveling. Growth Horizons paid about $9,700 in back wages to 55 workers with disabilities when it let its federal certificate to pay special minimum wages lapse in 2012. In addition, an investigator discovered that the prevailing wage and piece rates were not calculated correctly, according to department records. In late 2013, records show the nonprofit group was hit with another violation because some staff members who supervise disabled volunteers were being docked pay for lunch breaks they were not taking. Seven employees were paid about $10,400 in back wages. As of its latest application dated January 2014, 52 employees at Growth Horizons earned an average of $1.53 an hour for piece-rate assembly. Officials at Growth Horizons did not respond to requests for comment by deadline. There are about 3,300 employers in the country who are authorized to pay below minimum wage to workers with disabilities. Nationwide, the labor department conducted about 250 investigations of these employers in fiscal year 2013; it found nearly $1.4 million in back wages were owed to more than 7,400 employees, according to officials. Investigations are conducted for a variety of reasons. The labor department may receive a complaint or its investigators may believe an organization is doing something wrong based on information provided during the certification process, said Ellenjayne MacPherson, regional enforcement coordinator for the department’s wage and hour division in Philadelphia. “It doesn’t mean we’ll be checking the same people but often there will be a recidivism component put in,” she said. Anil Lewis, deputy executive director of the National Federation of the Blind Jernigan Institute, said the paper process by which employers apply to pay the low wages makes it simple to game the system. “If the entities had to input the data in a more automated fashion, the department would be more likely to catch the bad actors,” he said. Labor department officials say they are considering ways to automate the process and have provided an online calculator to assist agencies in correctly filling out the applications. Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Disabilities , Employment , Overlooked communities , Workplace safety Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton