Posted in Equity , IN-DEPTH , PUBLIC SAFETY Family or foster care? by Jacob Seibel March 5, 2014 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Don’t miss the story: More than 81,000 children have a parent in prison in PA An estimated 1.7 million children in the country have a parent in prison, according to a new report from the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. Millions more may have a parent in county jail. Read the full story … WILKES-BARRE — Chris Palmer Jr., of Pottsville, was in the Luzerne County Correctional Facility when his daughter, Lilli, was born. The jail gave him 14 hours to be there for her birth, and he didn’t see her again until she was almost 2. “It was a lot harder to develop the relationship because she didn’t know me,” said the 28-year-old. “It took her until she was almost 5 to warm up to me.” Last fall, Palmer Jr. went back to jail on drug charges. He said his stints behind bars have strained his relationship with his family. His father and stepmother became his daughter’s guardians in his absence. “My dad would say I should have been around and that they had to take my responsibility because of the poor decisions I made,” he said. “It was either that or have her go into foster care and be the state’s problem.” Palmer Jr. is scheduled to be released in May and plans to reconnect with his daughter, who will still be 5. Aside from being placed in foster homes, many children of incarcerated parents end up in the care of family members. “I never saw the curveball,” said Chris Palmer Sr., who is 57 and lives in the borough of Luzerne. “You don’t expect to keep up with a 5-year-old.” Regardless of the situation, Palmer Sr. said there’s no question that his granddaughter is in the best care. “She couldn’t be anywhere better,” he said. “She’s with her family. It’s that simple.” Reach Jacob Seibel at 570-821-2110 or jseibel@citizensvoice. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Care of children and elderly , Criminal Justice , Overlooked communities , Vulnerable populations