Posted in Daily report , posts The Daily Report: Aug. 22, 2015 by Alexandra Kanik August 22, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Alleged embezzlement from charity for terminally-ill kids Former high school baseball coach Steven Wetzel, 39, founded the Hero Program after the August 2008 death of an 18-year-old player who died of cancer. Facing federal charges, he apologized and said he’d plead guilty to some of the criminal counts he faces related to using $91,000 of the donations. Pittsburgh: Parkway congestion Construction on inbound I-376 and the Fort Pitt Tunnel will cause the thoroughfares to close until about 10 a.m. today and again at 9 p.m. into tomorrow morning. Last time this happened, people were experiencing delays of three hours or more in surrounding areas. Check for detours. Mercer County: Grove City College raises $95 million The four-year capital campaign actually surpassed the original goal of $90 million. The donations included $7 million from an anonymous source and other large gifts by the Richard King Mellon Foundation and the chairman of the college’s board of trustees. Allentown: Potentially losing another city official The police chief was named a finalist for the same job in Wichita, Kansas. He would be leaving behind a city government in turmoil and multiple disputes that involved alleged police brutality and a controversial assault case that involved his son. Statewide: No wrongdoing by Planned Parenthood Pennsylvania Secretary of Health Karen Murphy said the department found Planned Parenthood did not engage in the buying or selling of fetal tissue in the state. Statewide: Attorney General not going to release porn emails after all After Attorney General Kathleen Kane argued for — and got — permission from the state Supreme Court to release emails related to the porn scandal, she has now refused to release those same emails. Statewide: Lotto data not trade secret Lotto data can’t be withheld from the public, state judges ruled today . The Department of Revenue argued that disclosing the records would endanger public safety and compromise trade secrets. Pennsylvania: Kids receive added healthcare benefits Kids signed up for the state’s Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) can expect additional benefits come Dec. 1, 2015. Though the changes may not be felt by all CHIP kids, adjustments to mental health services and their out-of-pocket costs will be a welcome improvement to families who max out the current limits. NATIONAL Stock market falls U.S. stocks dipped to the lowest levels since February , but analysts don’t expect it to be a long-term problem. Worries about stability in Greece and China and anticipation of rising interest rates are likely contributors to the drop. Yet another way to mask super-rich political donors Limited liability corporations with almost no identifiable information are making big political contributions, such as the $1 million check to a political action committee aligned with Jeb Bush. Two female soldiers are first to graduate from Army Ranger school The two graduates earned regalia for their uniforms and will carry the title of Ranger, but will not be allowed to serve with the Army Rangers. Hurricane Danny becomes a Category 3 storm Hundreds of miles east of the Caribbean, the hurricane’s winds strengthened to 115 mph but it is expected to weaken by the time it reaches the islands. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor IN OTHER NEWS Families of all shapes and sizes enjoying summer fun If you’re in the habit of checking your shoes for snakes before putting them on, you might want to check your pool for bears before swimming. The daily report was compiled by the PublicSource staff. You can reach us with questions at info@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI