Posted in Local Government Construction on $1.4 billion terminal project at Pittsburgh International to start soon by Brian Hyslop, NEXTpittsburgh June 29, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A rendering of the arrivals hall in Pittsburgh International Airport's new terminal. (Courtesy of Gensler + HDR in association with luis vidal + architects.) This story was originally published by NEXTpittsburgh , a news partner of PublicSource. NEXTPittsburgh is an online publication about the people advancing the region and the innovative and cool things happening here. Sign up to get NEXTpittsburgh free. Construction should begin this summer on the $1.4 billion Terminal Modernization Program at Pittsburgh International Airport. The Allegheny County Airport Authority announced Thursday that a seven-year agreement has been approved by the airlines operating at the airport. That allows the airport authority to seek long-term bond financing for the project and to begin soliciting bids for the work. Airlines are expected to pay for the work through landing fees and other charges. “This approval is further proof of the airlines’ belief in the need for modernization, the strength of this market and their commitment to Pittsburgh,” airport authority CEO Christina Cassotis said in a statement . “We are committed to continuing our partnership with the airlines, keeping our costs stable and staying on budget and on schedule.” The 700,000-square-foot terminal will consolidate ticketing, security checkpoints, baggage claim and a multi-modal complex with a 3,300-space parking garage. It will replace the existing landside building and remove the need for the underground tram. The airlines approved preliminary work for the site in March, following a year-long pause due to the pandemic. Heavy construction is expected to begin this summer. The airport authority expects the project to use about 12,000 tons of steel, 94,000 tons of concrete and more than 354,000 square feet of wood materials, much of which the airport hopes to source locally. “The Terminal Modernization Program is a critical infrastructure project for the region and will deliver long-term economic benefits including jobs for more than 5,500 local construction and skilled trades workers,” said Rich Fitzgerald, Allegheny County Executive. Construction is scheduled to be completed by the end of 2024, with the opening in early 2025. “The new seven-year agreement, which fully approves the modernization program, marks a major milestone in a collaborative effort to develop and construct a world-class airport facility that will benefit Pittsburgh area customers for years to come,” Patrick Bowes, manager of corporate real estate for American Airlines, said. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI