Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The derailment roundup by PublicSource contributor April 15, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X oil_train Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Over the past several years, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. FRA accepting applications for safety implementation The Federal Railroad Administration [FRA] is taking applications for $25 million grants to install Positive Train Control [PTC], a safety feature that automatically brakes the train if it senses the speed is too high. Many railroads were mandated to have PTC installed by the end of last year, but Congress extended the deadline to 2018 after most of them failed to do so. Minnesota railroad officials denounce new safety bill Minnesota state emergency officials have called for new safety measures , wanting to know more detailed information faster for trains carrying hazardous materials, like oil. They’ve told railroad administrators they’d be blindsided if a derailment occurred. The railroads responded by saying that derailment incidents are down and there’s “no reason” to double the number of safety inspectors. Oil prices keep falling; drillers cut rigs fourth week in a row According to Reuters , worldwide crude oil production exceeds demand by 1.5 million barrels a day. The surplus has driven prices down by 70 percent since mid-2014, and energy companies in the United States have subsequently cut production to levels unseen since 2009. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Reach Stephanie Roman at sroman@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @ShogunSteph . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy