Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 4, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 4, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Alcoa plans $60M expansion to its Upper Burrell tech center Alcoa Inc. is investing $60 million in its research center , which will provide space to develop new 3-D printer technology and about 100 new employees. This will include researchers coming up with a way to improve cost and time efficiency for the technology. Pittsburgh: Former Highmark CEO sues company for wrongful termination Kenneth Melani , former president and CEO, is suing the insurance company for $34 million after he was fired following a dispute with his mistress’s husband in April 2012. Melani is seeking $25.8 million in severance and pension payments and $6.5 million in damages. He claims he was fired without cause, but Highmark officials said their decision to fire him was justified. Philadelphia: Federal charges against three in Ponzi scheme Three people who were part of Bala Cynwyd-based Mantria Corp. were charged Thursday with multiple counts of conspiracy and fraud . They persuaded retirees to invest in projects that weren’t real. The three collected $54.5 million in the scheme. Waynesburg: Fetal Alcohol Syndrome an issue for Greene County residents Fetal Alcohol Syndrome is a problem in Greene County , but it is difficult to diagnose in pregnant women and it is often unrecognizable until symptoms appear later in life. The Commonwealth Prevention Alliance said that one 1 in 100 babies may have some form of it. NATIONAL S.C. pursues death penalty in Charleston shooting case South Carolina Solicitor Scarlett Wilson filed court papers Thursday saying she will seek the death penalty for Dylann Roof, accused of the June shootings in Charleston . Roof, a 21-year-old white man, allegedly murdered nine people inside a historically black church. French confirm debris was from Malaysian Airlines flight A piece of debris that washed ashore on Reunion Island in the Indian Ocean in July was from the wing, also known as flaperon, of Malaysia Airlines flight 370 , according to the the Paris prosecutor’s office. The plane disappeared without a trace in March 2014 on its way to Beijing with 239 passengers and crew on board. Judge overturns Tom Brady’s suspension A federal judge ruled in favor of New England Patriots’ quarterback Tom Brady Thursday, nullifying his four-game suspension for a Deflategate controversy. U.S District Judge Richard M. Bergman said NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell went too far with his punishment. The NFL plans to appeal the judge’s ruling. SAT scores sink to lowest level in 10 years The Class of 2015 recorded the lowest composite SAT scores since 2005, with an average score of 1490 out of 2400, according to the College Board. Poverty and language barriers are two possible causes for the steady decline in the past decade. It also shows that  education-reform efforts aren’t working. Kentucky county clerk jailed after denying a marriage licence A federal judge ordered Kim Davis , Rowan County clerk, to jail for contempt Thursday after she refused to give a gay couple a marriage licence because of her religious beliefs. The judge claimed that jail was the only option because no amount of fines would change Davis’ mind. Chicago set to see highest property tax increase in state’s history Mayor Rahm Emanuel plans to raise money for a pension payment for firefighters and police next year with a call for the highest property tax hike in modern Chicago history. The increase will be between $450 million and $550 million. IN OTHER NEWS King cobra slithers through Orlando After a series of storms in Orlando, a king cobra escaped from its cage in a man’s home and is on the loose. Mike Kennedy, the snake’s owner, claims that his pet is not as big as other cobras, but is still extremely venomous and dangerous. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.