Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts PublicSource investigation led state to put amusement park inspection records online by Natasha Khan June 8, 2015 January 5, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Before you buckle into a roller coaster for an adrenaline rush this summer you might want to check the last time the ride was inspected. Last year, the state put inspection records for every amusement ride and attraction in Pennsylvania online via a new website . A 2013 PublicSource investigation revealed the Department of Agriculture’s amusement park regulatory office did not have all of the inspection reports for more than half of the state’s 117 permanent parks and water parks in 2012. That investigation sparked the state’s House Agriculture and Rural Affairs Committee to hold a hearing in October 2013 where legislators asked the department’s officials to find better ways to keep track of inspection records. The department responded by putting the records online. “Since the inception of the ‘Ride Safe PA’ website, the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture has increased public awareness of the requirements for Pennsylvania amusement rides,” said Logan Hall, a spokesman for the department. Users of the site can look up amusement parks by location and see the most recent inspection report available for a particular ride or attraction. Ride operators are also required to keep those reports on site; that way, people can request that the ride operators show them the reports, according to the department. Every ride operating in Pennsylvania must be registered with the state. Rides must be inspected by a qualified inspector before opening and at least once every 30 days for fixed rides (such as the ones at Kennywood) or each time a ride is set up (such as those at a carnival). Since its launch last year, the department has made changes to improve the website, including tracking fines more closely, Hall said. “We continue to educate the amusement ride industry to best utilize the online resources available from the department,” he said. There are more than 9,000 amusement rides in Pennsylvania. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan