Posted in DEVELOP PGH Strip District boom to roll on as two new projects win approval The two projects promise to bring 268 new residences to Pittsburgh’s former warehousing district. by Eric Jankiewicz November 1, 2022 November 3, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X An artist's rendering of a proposed apartment building, with car storage system, slated for the 2900 block of Smallman Street in the Strip District. The proposal by NEXT architecture won City Planning Commission approval on Nov. 1, 2022. The steady march of construction continues in the Strip District, with the City Planning Commission approving two new mixed-use residential projects on Tuesday. The approvals under Mayor Ed Gainey’s 10-month-old administration suggest that a building boom nurtured under predecessor Bill Peduto will continue. The two sites, one on Smallman Street and the other on 26th Street, won unanimous approval from the commissioners after the final plans were presented. Commissioner Rachel O’Neill noted that the Smallman Street project was unusual for including a space-saving parking rotary lift, where 14 cars will be stacked in each of three separate stackers. The Smallman Street site will also have 17 regular parking spaces. In total, the building will have 89 apartment units spread across eight floors along with a rooftop lounge area. The ground floor will also have space for a restaurant. The site designers from NEXT architecture also claim that the design is “rooted in sound environmental design practices” by, among other things, reducing stormwater runoff. The site will try to absorb stormwater through the planting of trees and an underground facility that will hold around 610 cubic feet of water. The 26th Street project calls for the demolition of a building on the one-acre site and then the construction of  179 residential units including 18 affordable units. Like much of the area, the site was previously industrial. While the public was invited to be heard, no speakers emerged and the commissioners expressed no significant concerns about the proposals. Eric Jankiewicz is PublicSource’s economic development reporter, and can be reached at ericj@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ericjankiewicz . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow , Pittsburgh , planning commission , Strip District Eric Jankiewicz ericj@publicsource.org Eric Jankiewicz is a reporter focused on housing and economic development for PublicSource. A native New Yorker, Eric moved to Pittsburgh in 2017 and has since fallen in love with his adopted city, even... More by Eric Jankiewicz