Posted in Daily report , posts July 21, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 21, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Weekend shooting investigations continue Over the weekend, several shootings happened within the city. In Knoxville, a 47-year-old woman was shot about 12:30 a.m. Monday; a man was shot in the Marshall-Shadeland neighborhood on Sunday; and 25-year-old Maria Bruno was shot to death in Brookline on Sunday, to name a few. Officers are searching for suspects, but as of Monday afternoon, no arrests have been made. Pittsburgh: City plans to fix steps of Pittsburgh The city is planning to repair its 700 stairways, which equal about 23 miles. For 2015, the city budgeted more than half of its $425,000 “wall, step and fence” program funds for step repairs or reconstruction. Pittsburgh: University recognizes faculty’s right to unionize Point Park University issued a news release on Monday saying that the university will recognize the right of full-time faculty members to unionize. The school’s faculty voted to unionize more than 11 years ago. Allegheny County: Constables charged after stealing $3,600 On Monday, the district attorney’s office said two local constables stole about $3,600 by submitting fraudulent invoices. The constables, David Rodriguez of Oakmont and Lawrence Taylor of Wilkinsburg, will be charged with theft, conspiracy and unsworn falsification to authorities. Somerset County: A suspicious fire The Monday fire at a former ski resort looks suspicious to a local fire chief. The chief said the unoccupied structure had been burning for some time before a neighbor reported it at about 3 a.m. NATIONAL Depression and substance abuse background Chattanooga shooting Muhuammad Youssef Abdulazeez, the man who allegedly shot and killed five service members in Tennessee last week, was first treated by a child psychiatrist for depression when he was 12 or 13 years old, according to a family spokesman . $6.5 million driverless city built by the University of Michigan M City, a 23-acre mini-metropolis where automakers can test autonomous, or driverless, cars opened Monday. In Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University professor Raj Rajkumar is a notable developer of software for autonomous vehicles. Read more about the test city here . Multimillion-dollar industry could be destroyed by mold and spiders Marijuana may have been legalized in some states (which does not currently include Pennsylvania), but the industry is at the mercy of mold and spider mites. Some producers are turning to pesticides and herbicides to prevent infestations, causing some health concerns . IN OTHER NEWS An exhibit of the works of 100 political cartoonists , including responses from cartoonists to the terrorist attack at the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo in January, has opened at the ToonSeum in downtown Pittsburgh. It will run until Sept. 20. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.