Posted in Daily report , posts May 29, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 29, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Duquesne University raises minimum wage to $16 Last year, the university raised its minimum to $15, and this raise will affect 168 employees who earn between $15 and $15.99. Duquesne is also offering 0.5 percent raises to employees who make less than $34,000 a year. Pittsburgh: Counterfeiter, thief, scammer sentenced A Pittsburgh man , involved in a Ugandan counterfeit money scheme, stealing $2.4 million from BNY Mellon and scamming people through eBay, will serve seven and a half years in federal prison. Harrisburg: PA schools submit plans for increased funding The vast majority of state schools produced plans about how they would spend money that would come to them through Gov. Tom Wolf’s proposed natural gas tax . Some schools would dedicate it to early childhood education, reducing class sizes or to restore cuts to programs and personnel. Greene County: Chevron settles lawsuit for $5 million The family of a man killed in a Marcellus shale gas well explosion in February 2014 will receive a $5 million settlement , most of which will go into a trust for his son, unborn at the time of his death. State College: Another sexual abuse complaint against Jerry Sandusky The complaint was denied by the Attorney General’s office. The problem is that the assault allegedly occurred in 1988, and the statute of limitations expires within 12 years of the victim’s 18th birthday. The case will likely be appealed. Harrisburg: ‘Fat shaming’ by high school officials A memo distributed to students regarding proper attire for the graduation ceremony warns female students not to let their “sausage rolls” show and to make sure none of their “bits and pieces” were hanging out. NATIONAL Nebraska repeals death penalty On Wednesday, lawmakers voted to eliminate the death penalty , making Nebraska the 19th state to do so. Pataki for President Bringing the total number of GOP contenders up to eight, former New York Gov. George Pataki joined the fray Thursday morning. Utah army facility shipped live anthrax to nine states and South Korea The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is working with other federal authorities to investigate up to 10 shipments of live anthrax spores. The spores were supposed to be dead. Lab employees who handled the materials are undergoing preventative treatment. About 1,400 college programs will not pass new accountability standards A rule implemented by the Obama Administration limits the loan payment amounts of graduates based on discretionary income. On Wednesday, 20 for-profit institutions in New York sued the government, calling the standards arbitrary, but a federal judge denied them. IN OTHER NEWS Giant rubber duck to visit Philly At next month’s Philadelphia Camden Tall Ships festival, spectators will be able to lay eyes on the 11-ton, six-story rubber duck designed by Dutch artist Florentijn Hofman. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.