Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts CDC map shows “distinctive” ways Americans die each year by state by Natasha Khan May 20, 2015 June 12, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X People in Pennsylvania and other coal-mining states are disproportionately more likely to die from black lung disease than the rest of the country. Not a huge surprise there, but what about in Louisiana? It’s syphilis. Or Arizona? Getting shot to death. Florida? HIV. That’s according to a weird new map published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention that looked at the most distinctive ways people die in each state and Washington D.C. from 2001 to 2010. It’s important to clarify that the map doesn’t show the most common cause of death per state, but rather a cause of death special to each state that is higher than the national rates for those causes. However, this means that sometimes only a handful of people are dying from these conditions. For instance, only 22 people died from syphilis in Louisiana and, in Montana, only 11 people died from rapidly progressive nephritic and nephrotic syndrome, which is a type of kidney disease. Here’s the original map (and here is a breakdown of the researchers’ methods): Mother Jones made another map with the causes of death translated from medical jargon to laymen’s terms: The map’s creators said they had seen maps become popular on social media in recent years depicting things like popular baby names or music, and wanted to make one with a little more clout. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor “I wondered what it would look like if you applied this to something more serious, like mortality data,” Francis Boscoe, a researcher with the New York State Cancer Registry who made the map, told NPR . It looks like the researchers got their wish. The map has gone viral on social media and has been covered by dozens of news outlets. Boscoe told NPR that the map has already sparked conversations with public health officials in some states about how to improve the classification of deaths. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org or 412-315-0261. Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan