Sponsored Learn More PublicSource accepts sponsored content that may be of interest to our readers. The following content was paid for by the author. Pennsylvania Women Work helps women overcome barriers and advance in leadership Pennsylvania Women Work’s programs support a more equitable workforce for all. Sponsored by Pennsylvania Women Work February 28, 2025 April 25, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Erica Glenn attended PA Women Work’s Communicating for Success program in October 2024. (Photo courtesy PA Women Work) As a leader at work, Danielle Matthews was looking for new ways to connect with women in her community and continue growing as a professional. She discovered Pennsylvania Women Work and a mission that deeply resonated with her. “I love my job and work in a supportive environment, but I had been dealing with my own personal challenges like unconscious bias and communication barriers. As I strove to continue to expand my network and skills, I was seeking mentorship and a supportive network,” Matthews shared. Women continue to be underrepresented in leadership positions. For many women, it can be hard to overcome barriers and the negative feelings that come along with gender stereotypes, such as feeling like a male colleague is better suited for a job. Additionally, many women struggle with imposter syndrome, leading them to doubt their accomplishments and abilities, despite proven skills and experience. According to the U.S. Government Accountability office in a 2023 study, women hold 42% of management positions. When it comes to senior management, an S&P Global article shows women hold just 25% of those positions. Underscoring it all is a persistent wage disparity. Women still earn less than men, making about 82 cents for every dollar earned by their male counterparts in 2022—a figure that has remained largely unchanged for two decades, according to Pew Research Center . Danielle Matthews (left) and Erica Glenn (right) attended PA Women Work’s Empowerment in the Workplace program in November 2024. (Photo courtesy PA Women Work) To break this trend and bypass gender biases, more resources and opportunities that support women in moving their careers forward need to be readily available. Women seeking career advancement can find support at PA Women Work through a network of professional women and one-on-one guidance and mentorship. “PA Women Work has always been dedicated to empowering individuals who are unemployed or underemployed, and that commitment will never waver,” said Kristin Ioannou, executive director of PA Women Work. “At the same time, we recognize that advancing women into leadership roles is critical to creating lasting change. We are proud to be part of the movement driving more women into the leadership positions they deserve.” Last year, PA Women Work launched a new program called Empowerment in the Workplace . During this one-day workshop, women learn negotiation strategies, boost their confidence and discuss gender biases and how to overcome them. On top of that, the women in attendance are connected to one another and bond. Matthews participated in a November 2024 session of the program. Kristin Ioannou, Executive Director of PA Women Work, greets a program participant. (Photo courtesy PA Women Work) “This workshop provided a safe and inspiring space to learn, grow and connect with others who understand and share similar experiences,” Matthews said. “I learned what barriers women have to confidence, how to know and define your worth and the importance of having a strong, supportive network. I left with new connections and a strong sense of community.” Erica Glenn also struggled with feeling inspired to pursue her career passion. Empowerment in the Workplace and her involvement with PA Women Work served as a support and resource as she stepped into her next chapter. “The workshops I attended with Pennsylvania Women Work have been invaluable,” Glenn said. “I put in practice what I learned and was able to overcome challenges and begin a new journey with a new role that I have the potential to thrive in.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting PA Women Work provides a space for women through their entire career journey to connect with one another and build their confidence through volunteer opportunities, no-cost programming, career coaching, mentorship and more. The community developed through PA Women Work has been transformative for Matthews. “It has given me a network of peers and mentors of amazing women who have provided me with unbiased guidance and validation of my experiences and feelings that have, in turn, left me feeling more confident and empowered,” she said. For those interested in signing up for an upcoming workshop or meeting with a career coach, visit www.pawomenwork.org today. The next Empowerment in the Workplace program is scheduled for May 3, and registration is available now. Sponsored by Pennsylvania Women Work Empowering women to advance in their careers and achieve self-sufficiency through life-changing career development programs and mentorship. Learn more about Pennsylvania Women Work Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow , Sponsored