Posted in COVID-19 PWSA is looking into options to address customers’ fears over upcoming rate increase by Oliver Morrison March 27, 2020 March 27, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority's water treatment plant in Lincoln–Lemington–Belmar. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) The Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority is considering options to address concerns of its customers over an upcoming rate increase scheduled to take effect in 2021. A notice is being sent out with water bills this month indicating that PWSA has requested rate increases for 2021 and 2022 from the Pennsylvania Utilities Commission [PUC]. “ If the Authority’s entire request and the multi-year rate plan is approved as filed, the total bill for water and wastewater conveyance service for a typical Residential customer using 3,000 gallons per month would increase from $72.49 to $86.31 per month or by 19.1% in 2021,” the note reads. Pittsburgh City Councilwoman Erika Strassburger, who was appointed to the PWSA board in February , asked at the end of the Friday board meeting, which took place on a conference call because of the coronavirus, if there was a way to reassure people or pull back on the communications about the rate increase, “with record numbers of people out of work.” “Or perhaps we need to think about a delay” in implementing the rate increase entirely, she said. “I’ve gotten a number of concerns. This is adding to the stress level for people who do not have a steady stream of income right now.” Bob Weimar, the executive director for PWSA, said the rate increase wouldn’t go into effect until next year. “We’ll discuss how we can get a message out there to allay the fears,” he said. Weimar said he would prepare something for the board to look at but it wasn’t immediately clear if a delay in the rate increase would be an option presented to the board. “ Bob’s reference was that we can step up communications to explain that this is a rate request and is subject to PUC approval, and would not be implemented until next year at the earliest,” Will Pickering, the deputy executive director at PWSA explained in an email after the meeting. “I’m not personally assured that this [the coronavirus] will not be having an impact in a year to come,” said Paul Leger, the board chair. “So that may not be the final answer.” PWSA will continue making progress in repairing lead lines, replacing drinking water infrastructure and expanding its stormwater program. To cover those plans the board approved a $300 million line of credit for its capital expenses going forward and allocated $59 million for water main replacements. Many of its current capital projects have been put on hold due to COVID-19, except for work deemed “essential.” PWSA continues to ensure everyone has access to clean drinking water. PWSA has promised that it won’t shut off water to any customers during the crisis, currently extending through at least the end of May. The note to customers says there are three ways they can challenge PWSA’s rate increase: speak at a PUC public hearing, send PUC a letter or file a formal complaint with PUC. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Jennifer Presutti, PWSA’s director of finance, wrote in an email that she thinks PWSA will be on sound footing in the short term, even taking a conservative approach. “Most utilities are bracing for a 15% to 20% impact on revenues,” she wrote. “We ran the numbers for a 30% impact and are still able to meet all of our obligations for the next four months.” Presutti added that she would be paying close attention to the revenues “and adjust accordingly with expenditures” but did not specify what might have to be cut in the future to keep the budget balanced for the year. Oliver Morrison is PublicSource’s environment and health reporter. He can be reached at oliver@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ORMorrison. PublicSource has a special page dedicated to our reporting on COVID-19 for the Pittsburgh region. See it here and sign up for our newsletter to stay informed. We hope you are following the news and, if your situation allows, social distancing guidelines .  Have a tip or an idea? Please email mila@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: PWSA Oliver Morrison oliver@publicsource.org x Oliver reports on K-12 education for PublicSource. Before becoming a journalist, Oliver taught English and drama in the Arkansas Delta for seven years. He has previously written education features in New... More by Oliver Morrison