Posted in Inside our Newsroom Inside our Newsroom: Truth, training and culture by Jourdan Hicks December 17, 2019 December 17, 2019 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Jourdan Hicks interviews Swissvale resident Crystal Jalil (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) This fall I realized how unique the PublicSource newsroom truly is. In October, I spent a week at the Poynter Institute for Media Studies in St. Petersburg, Florida. Alongside 30 reporters from across the country, I participated in an off-the-record exchange of tools and techniques to support new journalists like myself in realizing our potential, navigating our newsrooms and growing into stronger storytellers. From talking to other journalists, I learned how rare and special newsrooms like PublicSource are: where everyone is invested in the development of their journalists — no matter their experience. At the workshop, I met journalists from newsrooms without photographers, reporters with unresponsive editors and controlling tyrant owners. PublicSource is one of the few nonprofit newsrooms in Pittsburgh. Our “owner” isn’t a far-away media conglomerate with a divisive political agenda. It’s the public. It’s you. Donate to support our reporting here. More and more, journalists are feeling disconnected and unsupported by their newsrooms because of pressures of the news cycle and for-profit revenue models. Too many publications value clicks and shares over the actual reporting process, investigating and fact-checking. At PublicSource, we know that our community of readers holds the truth and detailed reporting in the highest regard, and you deserve reporting that reflects that. Because PublicSource is a nonprofit newsroom, and we rely on generous donations from readers like you, I’m proud to represent PublicSource in asking that you consider supporting us during this giving season. Your contribution makes it possible for us to pursue the truth, and to participate in training experiences that sharpen our skills, reporting and the culture of our newsroom. Thank you for your commitment. Thank you for sharing PublicSource’s stories, and thank you for your support. We’re looking forward to delivering more reporting and important storytelling to you in the new year. P.S. If you are interested to learn more about my reporting at PublicSource, you can watch this video created by the Facebook Journalism Project. Also, donations up to $180 are being matched by The Fine Foundation. Double your donation today . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Jourdan Hicks jourdan@publicsource.org instagram Jourdan is a senior community correspondent at PublicSource. Previously, Jourdan was engaged as a community-based educator in the Hazelwood section of the city. A lifelong Pittsburgh resident, she’s... More by Jourdan Hicks