Posted in VIDEO Watch: When it comes to community redevelopment, what’s in a name? by Jourdan Hicks July 22, 2019 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X ﻿ ﻿ There’s the North Shore known for its riverside stadiums and restaurants, and the South Side popular for its bars and businesses, but have you heard of the East Shore? It wouldn’t be a surprise if you hadn’t. It’s a relatively new name for a collection of long-established boroughs just outside of Pittsburgh. The ‘East Shore,’ as it’s being called, encompasses Swissvale, Rankin, North Braddock and Braddock. The campaign rolled out last summer as part of an economic redevelopment strategy to transform the region and attract new opportunities. But, for some, it sparked questions and concerns about why a new name is needed and if the name change was only the beginning of plans that could eventually lead to current residents searching for new homes. So, what happens when one part of a community is at odds with the other over strategies to reclaim and revamp its image for potential new residents? We spoke with four people who could shed light on the East Shore campaign and its potential effects. This is the final installment in a three-part series where we took a step back to explain important concepts bubbling below the surface of topical issues in Pittsburgh and its surrounding areas. Jourdan Hicks is a community reporter at PublicSource, she can be reached at jourdan@publicsource.org. Ryan Loew is PublicSource’s visual storyteller/producer. He can be reached at ryan@publicsource.org or on Twitter at @RyanLoew . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Jourdan Hicks jourdan@publicsource.org instagram Jourdan is a senior community correspondent at PublicSource. Previously, Jourdan was engaged as a community-based educator in the Hazelwood section of the city. A lifelong Pittsburgh resident, she’s... More by Jourdan Hicks