Posted in DATA , HEALTH , Local Government , PUBLIC SAFETY , SALARIES DATA Pennsylvania state salaries 2015 by Natasha Khan February 5, 2016 January 16, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource wants you to know how your tax dollars are being spent. We believe it’s important to make the salaries of city, county and state employees easy for you to find because there are taxpayer dollars at stake. Pennsylvania makes state salaries available online, and the figures are updated monthly. However, the information is not easily accessible to the public. It is only available to download as a PDF document of roughly 4,350 pages. Because the state uses a PDF format, users can’t sort or easily explore the data. Upon request, the data is available as a spreadsheet. PublicSource received an export of the state salary data on PennWATCH , current as of Dec. 15, 2015. The salary information contains an employee’s annual salary or hourly wage. An employee’s actual take-home pay may be higher or lower than this figure because overtime and other bonuses are not included. “Some salaries are paid with federal funds, tolls, or fees,” according to the state website. Also, some employees do not take some or all of their salary. For instance, Gov. Tom Wolf does not personally receive the public salary he is allotted in this data. He donates it to charity. Remember as you look at the salaries that some may seem lower than private-sector jobs, but public employees receive generous benefits and pensions. Explore the state data and let us know if you find something we should report on. Contact reporter Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org. Follow him on Twitter @holmberges . Top paid person in each department FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Criminal Justice , Data , Economy , Employment , State oversight of health and welfare systems Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan