Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts PA’s health department is handing out Zika prevention kits for pregnant women by PublicSource contributor July 15, 2016 January 9, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Pennsylvania Department of Health took another step in its campaign to protect residents from the Zika virus. Yesterday, the department began to distribute prevention kits for pregnant women. Symptoms from the Zika virus, which is primarily transmitted by mosquitoes, are typically mild and can include fever, rash, muscle and joint pain, pink eye and headaches. However, serious birth defects, including microcephaly in which babies’ heads are smaller than normal, can occur when pregnant or soon-to-be pregnant women are infected. Transmission of the disease occurs mainly in two ways: being bitten by an infected mosquito and from sexual contact with an infected partner. There is currently no vaccine against the virus, which was first discovered in 1947 , so health officials recommend practicing mosquito avoidance. The kits provide information about the virus and include condoms, insect repellent and tablets to kill mosquito larvae in standing water. The latest initiative is a sign of caution from the Department of Health. The two species of mosquitos that carry Zika are rare in Pennsylvania. The mosquito species capable of spreading Zika lives in southern and southeastern Pennsylvania, but it is not very effective at spreading the virus, according to the Department of Health. Thus far, the only confirmed cases in the commonwealth are in people who have traveled abroad and a University of Pittsburgh researcher who accidentally infected herself while working with the disease. So far, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has confirmed 40 cases in the United States. On June 29, the department launched a Zika Prevention and Awareness Campaign with an airport poster campaign, targeting Pennsylvanians traveling abroad to areas where Zika is prevalent, such as Mexico, South America and the Caribbean. In its press release regarding the prevention kits, the Department of Health said, “Once warmer temperatures arrive in the commonwealth and remain in place throughout the summer months, the risk of limited local transmission of Zika virus by the type of mosquito that potentially carries it will increase.” Monitoring of the Zika-carrying mosquito species requires different tactics than the state Department of Environmental Protection uses to monitor other mosquito species, such as those that can transmit the West Nile Virus. While no funding was specifically allocated to combat the Zika virus, the recently passed state 2016-2017 budget appropriated an additional $73,000 to West Nile Virus Control, bringing the total to more than $4 million. Zika prevention kits for pregnant women are available free of charge and can be obtained at county health departments, federally qualified health centers, community health centers, WIC (Women, Infants and Children) offices and other nonprofit organizations that service women who are low income or homeless. Pregnant women can visit www.zika.pa.gov to find a kit provider in their area. Christopher Reed is a PublicSource reporting intern. Reach him at creed@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI