Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource establishes audience team, names new K-12 education reporter by Halle Stockton November 8, 2021 November 10, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X We have some exciting shifts within our newsroom to announce, and it has everything to do with serving you better. TyLisa C. Johnson , who you know as our K-12 education reporter, has been promoted to become PublicSource’s first audience engagement editor. In that role, she will work to build relationships with our current audience and help others discover our journalism, online and offline. She will focus more attention on what you want from our newsletters and social media feeds. TyLisa will also produce audience-driven stories on a variety of topics in accessible formats. Before this change becomes official-official, later this week, PublicSource will release an in-depth project by TyLisa about truancy among students in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. Contact TyLisa by emailing tylisa@publicsource.org or on Twitter @tylisawrites. Jourdan Hicks , host of the From the Source podcast, has been promoted to senior community correspondent. In that role, she will not only continue to host the podcast (expect season three to launch in next month!), but she will also look to attend more community gatherings, host events and offer education opportunities to our followers. Contact Jourdan by emailing jourdan@publicsource.org or on Instagram @hicksjourdan. Together, TyLisa and Jourdan will drive efforts in our newsroom and out in the community to connect with you, our audience, on a deeper level. So tell us: What would you like to see in how PublicSource engages with the community? Are there unanswered questions swirling about your community? Is there an event or resource you wish existed? Oliver Morrison , who has been a reporter at PublicSource since 2017, will step in to cover K-12 education in Pittsburgh and elsewhere in Allegheny County. Oliver is a former middle and high school English and drama teacher and is looking forward to turning his attention back toward education. He just released a compelling project on the crisis and turnaround at Pittsburgh’s water authority as he transitions off of the environment beat, so be sure not to miss the series. He would love to hear from you on what kind of education coverage you’re looking for. Contact Oliver by emailing oliver@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ormorrison. PublicSource is not abandoning coverage of environmental issues. We still want to hear your tips and ideas to help us answer your questions and produce important in-depth articles. Send in ideas through this pitch form or email me at halle@publicsource.org , along with any comments or questions you may have about these changes. Halle Stockton is the managing editor of PublicSource. She can be reached at halle@publicsource.org or 412-515-0065. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton