Posted in Daily report , posts July 20, 2015 by swalsh July 20, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Harrisburg: The most vulnerable will suffer from budget battle and delay County services for the homeless, children and those with physical disabilities, among others, will be hurt by the continuing delay of state funds as legislators and Gov. Tom Wolf struggle to come to terms on a budget. Pittsburgh: Turnpike tolls go up, but not for all Pennsylvania tolls will go up for you and me. But not for everyone. Pennsylvania turnpike employees and contractors continue to drive free , despite auditors general in the state saying they shouldn’t. Beaver County: Man dies from rattlesnake bite If you know someone who gets bitten by a rattler , don’t try to suck the venom out, just call 911. Philadelphia: Want cheaper Internet and cable, move to Paris An American in Paris found that his bills for Internet, cable TV and telephone were one-third of what they were in the United States. PublicSource looks at the 1.1 million in Pennsylvania who don’t have Internet access . NATIONAL Trump says McCain is not a hero This is what it took to get other Republican contenders for the presidential nomination to condemn Donald Trump . From flames to rain in California Just days after fires swept across the Las Vegas Freeway, rains swept through desert areas of Joshua Tree National Park, washing out a bridge. And they say it never rains in Southern California. More on the Bill Cosby scandal Another deposition from cases where women claimed that comedian Bill Cosby raped them was released by the New York Times . And no one less than t he president said that what Cosby described was rape. IN OTHER NEWS Everybody’s talking about 36 hours The New York Times feature, 36 hours in Pittsburgh. Two things some have noticed: There are no people of color in Pittsburgh (with the exception of a biker and a taster of grappa); and you’d better hurry to Salt of the Earth, one of the featured restaurants. It’s closing August 1. The daily report was compiled by Sharon Walsh, editor of PublicSource. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at swalsh@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.