Posted in DATA , DEVELOP PGH , Economy & Housing , Education , Environment , Equity , HEALTH , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY New section gives you resources and tips to take action by Halle Stockton January 3, 2016 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X We’ve made it a habit to provide readers with a few ways to take action after reading our in-depth and investigative stories on issues of criminal justice, the environment, politics and health. You usually see that information in a small box on the side of a story or at the end. Today, PublicSource is launching a page on the website that will make those tips and resources more readily available. There you can find suggestions on how to find the right nursing home or where to go for help if you’re a veteran or single parent in need. We also provide tips on how to prepare your families for a disaster or guide a loved one coping with a drug addiction to treatment and support. PublicSource writes stories about these issues to educate readers about critical issues facing the community. The tools found on this page serve to inform our followers of how they can take action after they’ve read our stories. You can use some of the information to help yourself, and some of it will give you the knowledge you need to push for change on social issues that concern the well-being of others. We will continue to add to this page as we discover more reliable resources in the region. In the future, access the page directly by clicking the ‘Resources’ tab in the navigation bar at the top of the home page. Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or at hstockton@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @HalleStockton . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Aging , Care of children and elderly , Criminal Justice , Disabilities , Drug abuse and rehabilitation , Nursing homes , Overlooked communities , State oversight of health and welfare systems , Veterans affairs , Vulnerable populations , Women's rights Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton