Posted in COVID-19 PA stops taking new male prisoners for ‘several days’ to establish quarantine procedure The new system applies only to men. New female inmates will continue to be taken in at two locations but only twice per week. by Oliver Morrison March 23, 2020 March 31, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Pennsylvania Department of Corrections photo) Update (3/31/20): Following a Pennsylvania inmate’s positive test for COVID-19 at SCI Phoenix, the Department of Corrections [DOC] on Sunday night implemented an inmate quarantine at all state prisons. The inmate had previously been isolated. State inmates will be fed in their cells as well as given time for video chats, library time and phone calls outside of their cell, according to a DOC press release. Prisons will also enforce social distancing recommendations for every inmate. This move impacts the 44,600 inmates housed in Pennsylvania’s 25 state-run prisons. County-run facilities are not impacted. Previously, around 250 inmates and staff who interacted with the inmate at SCI-Phoenix were isolated in a single housing unit and have been given personal protective equipment. The DOC stopped taking new inmates for a few days last week while it prepared a new system for admitting new inmates at a single one of its 25 facilities for men. There has been a controversy in Allegheny County about whether to release prisoners early because of the potential for disease to spread inside. The Pennsylvania Department of Corrections [DOC] said it will stop accepting new male prisoners for “several days” as it sets up a new centralized system for bringing new men into the prison system in an effort to stop the spread of coronavirus. The new policy only applies to men; women will still be accepted at two separate facilities because there are fewer female inmates and only two prisons total, according to a DOC spokesperson. There are 25 prisons for men in the state. “Currently, we have no positive cases of COVID-19 in our state prison inmate population, and we are working to delay the virus entering our system,” DOC Secretary John Wetzel said in a press release. “This change in how we receive newly sentenced inmates and parole violators will reduce the number of ways individuals enter our system. With this plan, moving forward, only one facility will be involved, greatly reducing the ways the virus can enter our system.” For now, new intakes will be received at the State Correctional Institution [SCI] at Retreat. Then after an initial quarantine, the new men will be sent to SCI-Camp Hill for classification and evaluation, according to the state. New female inmates will continue to be received at SCIs Muncy and Cambridge Springs. But it only will accept new commitments on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Wetzel informed sheriffs of the new policy in a March 23 morning conference call. DOC officials said they will transfer some inmates to other state prisons to make room at SCI at Retreat, “while leaving a number of inmates to work in dietary and maintenance areas.” They are also increasing the medical staff and medical supplies at this facility and say the staff will have personal protective equipment. Normally, the DOC receives about 150 new men into its system each week. The DOC listed several other steps it was taking: Working with the parole board to maximize releases Expediting the release process for anyone with a pending home plan Reviewing inmates within the state prison system who are beyond their minimum sentences Reducing the number of re-entrants in halfway houses Giving each inmate released a medical screening and referring to doctors when appropriate Oliver Morrison is PublicSource’s environment and health reporter. He can be reached at oliver@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ORMorrison. PublicSource has a special page dedicated to our reporting on COVID-19 for the Pittsburgh region. See it here and sign up for our newsletter to stay informed. We hope you are following the news and, if your situation allows, social distancing guidelines .  Have a tip or an idea? Please email mila@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Oliver Morrison oliver@publicsource.org x Oliver reports on K-12 education for PublicSource. Before becoming a journalist, Oliver taught English and drama in the Arkansas Delta for seven years. He has previously written education features in New... More by Oliver Morrison