Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts PublicSource is bringing you news every day by swalsh May 16, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource is changing. You know us as a provider of in-depth and investigative news about Pittsburgh and the state. Now, we’re offering readers even more. Each day, we’ll curate and post the most important stories in the state and the nation on our website in a Daily Report . You don’t have to go to our more than 50 news partners around the state for what’s happening. We’ll do it for you, bringing you a brief summary of the best stories about Pennsylvania. It will be posted on our website by 6 a.m. You should also come back to our website for the important news of the day on the topics we cover: Politics and money , criminal justice , the environment , and the elderly and disabled . And we’ve recently added another subject: health issues. Be on the lookout for upcoming stories in this important area by Halle Stockton, who also covers aging and disability issues. Last week, for example, we updated you on the Amtrak crash in Philadelphia and the nearby rail cars that some were worried might be oil tankers. They weren’t . We told you about food deserts and access to good nutrition; how the national head of the Fraternal Order of Police wants to slow down police reform, and that a new piece of equipment may put anesthesiologists out of work. Every Friday, Natasha Khan updates you on incidents involving train derailments . So come back every day for our Daily Report on events in the state and the nation and for our daily posts on the areas we cover. And we’ll continue to provide you with our in-depth stories on our website and in our newsletter, which you can sign up for here . Sharon Walsh is the editor of PublicSource and can be reached at swalsh@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.