Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Carnegie Mellon researchers got $10 million from the EPA to study air quality in Pittsburgh by Natasha Khan May 4, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The federal government is dishing out $30 million in funding to three universities for air quality research, and Pittsburgh’s Carnegie Mellon University has snagged $10 million of it. The grant goes to CMU’s new Center for Air, Climate and Energy Solutions and will be used, in part, to perform air pollution studies in Pittsburgh, Los Angeles and Austin. Harvard and Yale universities also received $10 million each for air quality studies. “It’s an incredible opportunity,” Allen Robinson, director of the new center told the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review . “It’ll give us the resources to pursue things we’ve wanted to pursue. The outcomes will be pretty neat.” Robinson told 90.5 WESA that the work the center will do will provide researchers with “unprecedented insight into literally block-by-block air quality” in Pittsburgh. He said CMU researchers will collect data on different air pollutants, including fine particles and sulfur dioxide, from about 100 sites around Pittsburgh and also collect data from mobile monitors every two minutes. From WESA : “Putting the results in a framework that’s more conducive for policy makers to think about. When we say, ‘Air pollution in Pittsburgh is 10,’ well, what does that mean?” Robinson said. “But if you think about it in terms of what the cost is in public health and things like that, putting it in a framework that you can then compare it to other decisions you’re trying to make.” Robinson said he is hopeful the data gathered at the center will inform policy decisions around transportation planning, shale gas development, electric vehicle subsidies and other issues. Pittsburgh’s air quality continues to rank among the worst in the country. Last month, an annual air quality report by the  American Lung Association ranked Southwestern Pennsylvania 8th out of 200 metropolitan areas for highest year-round particle pollution and 14th for highest short-term particle pollution. The report also noted that in Allegheny County, nearly 200,000 adults suffer from asthma or cardiovascular disease. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan