Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan April 4, 2015 June 12, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been at least four train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations. To keep up with these incidents, PublicSource will provide a roundup of stories every week. Under new safety laws passed by state regulators in North Dakota, oil companies now must remove certain liquids and gases before shipping, according to the Associated Press . New rules take effect for North Dakota crude oil shipments Do those North Dakota rules go far enough? Maybe not, industry experts told Reuters . North Dakota’s new oil train safety checks seen missing risks For the first time, the Energy Information Administration is tracking crude-by-rail movements across the U.S. Here’s a graph from their website that shows the flow of oil in the U.S. in 2014 (notice how much is coming into Pennsylvania from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale — it’s the fattest green arrow.​ Here’s a gif The Washington Post put out using these maps to show how crude-by-rail has increased since 2010. Check out the data . Harrisburg city council members discuss the secrecy over “bomb trains” and urge federal and state agencies to speed up efforts to minimize derailments, according to The Patriot News . Harrisburg council members hear concerns about so-called ‘bomb trains’ ​ Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan