Posted in Trump Impacts How is DOGE touching Pittsburgh? PublicSource employs FOIA to find out. The Department of Government Efficiency, inspired by Elon Musk, says it’s cleaning up the federal government. PublicSource is using the Freedom of Information Act to seek DOGE’s communications about Pittsburgh. by Rich Lord April 9, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photos via Adobe Stock and Wikimedia Commons. Photo illustration by Natasha Khan Vicens/PublicSource) The new Department of Government Efficiency claims to be purging deceased people from the Social Security rolls, cutting federal employees’ credit card use and hunting down “wasteful contracts and grants” all over Washington, D.C. The brainchild of tech mogul Elon Musk has also been a defendant in court fights in which DOGE is accused of accessing citizens’ sensitive data , hacking at the federal workforce in ways that may compromise government services and potentially degrading national security . PublicSource wants to know: How is DOGE interacting with key federal agencies regarding  their operations in and around Pittsburgh? So far, courts have held that DOGE and its activities are subject to the federal Freedom of Information Act. So this month, PublicSource reporters across our six core coverage areas — local government, economy and housing, environment, K-12 education, higher education and health — submitted FOIA requests to agencies related to their beats: The Office of Personnel Management The Department of Homeland Security Immigration and Customs Enforcement The Department of Housing and Urban Development The Department of Education The National Institutes of Health The Environmental Protection Agency [EPA]. In all cases, we requested documents in the possession of the agency that meet all of the following criteria: Dated on or after Jan. 20, 2025 through the present Include the word “Pittsburgh” (or, in the case of one agency, a broader geography) Include either “Department of Government Efficiency” or the acronym “DOGE.” Records requests can unearth revealing communications. A PublicSource FOIA in 2021, for instance, showed how officials at multiple levels worked to move a key boundary line within the Hill District. But FOIA offices were backlogged long before President Donald Trump began his current term, and there have been reports that some departments have dismissed staff assigned to handling information requests. The FOIA law also includes exceptions to the general rule that government documents are public upon request. Last year PublicSource used FOIA in pursuit of documents describing EPA’s interactions with EQT Corp., in an effort that stalled when the company objected to release. So this might take a while. We’ll track the responses we receive below, and let you know when requested documents arrive, and what they include. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Know something about DOGE’s effects on the Pittsburgh area? Read this to learn about options for sharing your insights with PublicSource. Rich Lord is the managing editor of PublicSource, and can be reached at rich@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord