Posted in DEVELOP PGH , Economy & Housing How housing policy over the last century has made Pittsburgh what it is today by Devin Rutan May 17, 2017 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X To understand the present, we need to know the past.  Pittsburgh’s neighborhoods have been designed, shaped and defined by their past. As we move through Pittsburgh, we are surrounded by the visions of generations of politicians, planners and investors who have shaped this city for better and worse. Our communities are a product of their careful planning and execution but also their shortcomings and biases. Housing policies of the past dictated what homes were built where, who could live in what community and how affordable the housing was, is and will be. We tend to pay most attention to what is happening in politics at the national level but often the policies and decisions that have had the most impact in shaping our neighborhoods happen at the local level. This timeline of housing policies in Pittsburgh outlines many of these historic issues and attempts to shed light on how the city has evolved. For instance, urban renewal projects in the Lower Hill District or in East Liberty are relevant to the most pressing issues today. Often, these policies have the biggest impact on low-income families, but every neighborhood has been designed, undermined, elevated, stimulated or reconfigured by local housing policy at one time or another. This graphic was built by PublicSource Interactives & Design Editor Natasha Khan. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI 4 replies on “How housing policy over the last century has made Pittsburgh what it is today” Steve Crumley says: June 9, 2019 at 5:59 pm We were one of the first families to move into the Allegheny Dwellings  about 1941 or so (I was born in 1937).  There were 17 buildings, each with about 18 apartments.  At the time this was a Federal Housing Project, run or overseen by the U.S. Government.  Only two buildings were exclusively allotted for black occupancy.  Strict racial segregation was the policy of the day and continued beyond the time I entered the U.S.M.C. in 1959. Mark Fb Knobil says: May 20, 2017 at 11:32 am To a casual reader, it looks like a long history of government funneling money through the URA to help commercial interests demolish communities of Color. Just sayin’ George Moses says: May 18, 2017 at 9:54 am There are many that you you forgot to mention such as Federal Housing Budgets cuts started by Bill Clinton, Hope VI, Demo-Disposition, ending Project Based Section 8, one for one replacement. You also did not mention the loss of Westgate Village, Federal American Properties, Pennley Place, East Liberty Gardens in East Liberty. St. Clair Village and part of Arlington Heights. Evan Stoddard says: May 18, 2017 at 7:32 am This is an interesting and helpful history. However, you missed at least one major development that was more significant than many of the more recent developments you do identify, namely, passage of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, which marked the beginning of the many housing loan and grant programs that the URA has operated in low and moderate-income communities throughout the city since that time. The Community Development Block Grant essentially replaced the categorical grants that funded the Lower Hill, East Liberty, and Allegheny Center redevelopment projects. Comments are closed.