Posted in Daily report , posts May 21, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 21, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Good morning. Here’s the news you need to know. PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Lowest Memorial Day gas prices in a decade Next time you go to the pump, it might be a relief to know that Allegheny County averages 95 cents less per gallon of gas than this time last year. Analysts at GasBuddy predict gas prices this summer will be the cheapest since 2005. Pittsburgh: OxyCide hospital cleaner contains harmful chemicals UPMC employees filed a complaint with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration regarding the use of the cleaner containing peracetic acid, which can cause severe burns. The complaint’s been closed, but methods for testing peracetic acid aren’t standardized and more investigation might be needed. Pittsburgh: Shaler High School evacuated A suspicious device was found near the high school’s auditorium on Wednesday. Police K-9s swept the premises for other threats, and all students and faculty were evacuated. Philadelphia: Jim Kenney passes primary to become Democrats’ candidate An analysis of Kenney’s strategy , which won him the support of Philly Democrats and set him up to become the city’s next mayor. Kenney received endorsements from several important groups, including unions, black leaders, women, police and the gay community. Southwestern Pennsylvania: Primary election results Check out this graphic to see who was nominated. Statewide: Slow growth for women-owned businesses Pennsylvania has the seventh-highest number of women-owned firms in the U.S., but is ranked 28th in the growth of new women-owned businesses over 18 years. Researchers are trying to figure out the reasons behind the stagnation. NATIONAL Massive recall of defective airbags The Japanese auto parts company Takata is issuing a recall that affects 34 million U.S. vehicles . Takata supplies about 30 percent of the world’s airbags. Those who drive Toyotas, Hondas, BMWs and Fords may receive calls from their dealerships. Coastal California oil spill The Coast Guard estimated that an oil pipeline rupture released 21,000 gallons of crude into the Pacific on Tuesday, covering about four miles of ocean and beach. Four global banks fined for market rigging JPMorgan Chase, Citigroup, Barclays and The Royal Bank of Scotland fixed rates on U.S. dollars and euros . The Department of Justice fined the banks $2.5 billion in criminal penalties, but additional charges bring the combined total to more than $5 billion. IN OTHER NEWS University of Kentucky’s body bequeathal program The cremated remains of hundreds of people who donated their bodies to scientific research at the University of Kentucky went unburied for an average of 3.2 years when it should have taken only six months, according to an audit. Philadelphians hook a giant mako shark On Saturday, five Philadelphia natives aboard the “Missfit” sailed into Cape May, N.J., looking for tuna. After an 80-minute grapple, they subdued something much more impressive, an 820-pound shark, the second largest ever caught in New Jersey. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.