Typewriter ribbons and newsreels Still from His Girl Friday (1940) Get away from the age of social media and smart phones, and go back in time to typewriter ribbons and newsreels… Join PublicSource and Pittsburgh Filmmakers each Sunday evening in September for a series of films about the old days of journalism, when reporters in the movies uncovered big stories and bigger truths. Citizen Kane (1941) Sept. 1, 8 p.m. Still a critics’ favorite 72 years after its release, “Citizen Kane” is the story of reporters trying to decipher a newspaper tycoon’s last word, “Rosebud.” With Joseph Cotten, Agnes Moorehead (TV’s “Bewitched”) and Orson Welles. His Girl Friday (1940) Sept. 8, 8 p.m. Should love and journalism mix? This old-school romantic comedy follows an ace reporter and the ex who doesn’t want her to remarry, and who is also her editor. With Rosalind Russell and Cary Grant. Ace in the Hole (1951) Sept. 15, 8 p.m. Can ambitious journalists do more harm than good when a life-or-death drama unfolds? Director Billy Wilder brings us Chuck Tatum, a former big-city reporter stuck in Albuquerque when another man’s plight offers a chance to jump-start Tatum’s career. With Kirk Douglas. Medium Cool (1969) Sept. 22, 8 p.m. When do you go from observing and reporting to being part of the story? Cultural upheaval takes center stage in the life of John Cassellis, who finds himself and his TV news camera in the midst of violence erupting around the 1968 Democratic National Convention. With Robert Forster (TV’s “Alcatraz” and “Heroes”). All the President’s Men (1976) Sept. 29, 8 p.m. How did two investigative reporters bring down a U.S. President? In this modern classic based on a true story, reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein investigate and uncover the details of the Watergate scandal that leads to President Nixon’s 1973 resignation. With Dustin Hoffman and Robert Redford. Location All films show at the Regent Square Theater, 1035 S. Braddock Ave., Pittsburgh PA 15218 Admissions $9.00 General Admission $4.00 Students (Pitt, CMU, Art Institute and Point Park w/ ID) $7.00 Seniors and other Students Sponsors About Public Source About Newsletters Contact us Send tips & ideas Advertise with us Donate Membership FAQs Republishing guidelines Our partners Board of Directors Jobs Working with us