Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Feds intend to require two-person crews on crude-oil trains by Natasha Khan April 11, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The U.S. Department of Transportation has announced its intention to require two-person crews on all crude-oil trains in response to a 2013 incident in Quebec in which a train operated by one man was left unmanned and derailed, killing 47 people. The move is opposed by the railroads, Bloomberg reports. “Safety is our highest priority, and we are committed to taking the necessary steps to assure the safety of those who work for railroads and shippers, and the residents and communities along shipping routes,” said U.S. Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx in a press release . From Bloomberg : The Association of American Railroads , whose members include Berkshire Hathaway Inc.’s BNSF, said large railroads already run oil trains with at least two crew members. Nevertheless, Edward Hamberger, the group’s chief executive officer, said the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) “has never shared an iota of data that shows or proves two-person crews are safer.” “If a regulation is proposed, then the least that can be expected is that a federal agency should back it up with grounded data that justifies the recommend rule,” Hamberger said in a statement. FRA administrator Joseph Szabo said in the agency’s statement that two-person crews would improve the safe transport of crude oil. A sharp increase in North American crude-oil production — mainly because of fracking — has pushed a high percentage of crude oil onto the tracks. In 2008, there were 9,500 carloads of crude oil on the tracks in the country. In 2013, that number ballooned to 415,000 carloads, according to the Association of American Railroads. This week’s move is the latest in a series of safety measures issued by U.S. regulators to improve crude-oil transport, after a series of derailments in the U.S. and Canada over the last year. PublicSource recently wrote about new regulations in the works for outdated rail tank cars being used to ship the massive amounts of crude oil being pumped out of the ground in the U.S. Federal investigators have shown, for more than 20 years, that these rail cars are unsafe and often spill their loads in the case of derailments. These cars are being used to ship crude oil across Pennsylvania, mainly to oil refineries in Philadelphia. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org or 412-315-0261. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Transportation , Workplace safety Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan