Posted in Daily report , posts May 16, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 16, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: UPMC patient data stolen An employee of a company that handled emergency room billing for UPMC has stolen data from more than 2,000 patients . A federal investigation is ongoing. Pittsburgh: Squirrel Hill Democrats still support Danko Although Allegheny County Councilwoman Barbara Daly Danko died May 6, two Squirrel Hill organizations are rallying Democrats to vote for her as a tribute. Philadelphia: Frankford Junction to regain functionality next week The last of Amtrak 188’s wreckage was removed Friday, and crews have been working to rebuild the track and restore service . Amtrak hopes to have partial service available Monday and full service by Tuesday. Harrisburg: City owes $3.2 million for failed construction The developer of the Capital View Commerce Center went bankrupt, and now Harrisburg must repay $3.2 million in federal loans over the next 11 years. The city will pay the debt from money mainly designated to benefit low-income residents. Statewide: Underage drinking in PA higher than national average A report from the Pennsylvania Commission on Crime and Delinquency indicates that 74 percent of the state’s high-school seniors admitted to using alcohol, while the national average is 68 percent. NATIONAL Iconic blues musician B.B. King dies B.B. King , Rock and Roll Hall of Famer and winner of 15 Grammy awards, died in Las Vegas late on Thursday night at 89. NASA predicts ice shelf’s demise The Larsen B ice shelf in the Antarctic has a growing crack that leads NASA and other researchers to believe that it will disintegrate by the end of the decade, which could add several millimeters of water to the rising sea level. The story of an Alzheimer’s sufferer Sandy Bem was a Cornell psychology professor from Pittsburgh, a feminist and an Alzheimer’s patient. She vowed to take her life before the disease took it from her. Boston Marathon bomber receives death penalty It took the jury more than 14 hours to arrive at a verdict , but it was unanimous. Dzhokhar Tsarnaev will receive the death penalty for his involvement in the Boston Marathon bombing, though the decision will likely be appealed. IN OTHER NEWS Google’s driverless cars Google’s prototype driverless cars will hit the roads in California this summer, accompanied by “safety drivers” in case of accidents . Preakness Stakes are high for Pharoah Kentucky Derby winner American Pharoah will battle for the second jewel in the Triple Crown today. The race will start around 6:15 p.m. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.