Posted in COVID-19 A Pittsburgh doctor’s 30-minute routine to protect her newborn from COVID-19 by Oliver Morrison April 2, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Dr. Monica Gomberg has a three-month old newborn and she said there is some evidence children under 1 years-old may be more at risk than other youth. So she isn't taking any chances. (Photo by Kimberly Rowen/PublicSource) Dr. Monica Gomberg, a doctor at Associates in Endocrinology in Bethel Park, recently returned to work after maternity leave. To ensure she doesn’t expose her newborn to the coronavirus, she follows an extensive daily routine after her work day. At work, she is taking extra precautions as well: she has started wearing scrubs at work, even though typically, she just wears business wear. Gomberg also wipes down her patient room after every visit, and she has an extra breast pump she calls her “COVID pump,” she leaves it at work so she isn’t bringing germs home. Her routine at home starts as soon as she drives into her garage. It usually takes Gomberg 20 to 30 minutes. And only after the routine, which she describes in the video below, is she able to hug and kiss her baby girl. Dr. Monica Gomberg on COVID-19 precautions at home from PublicSource on Vimeo . Oliver Morrison is PublicSource’s environment and health reporter. He can be reached at oliver@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ORMorrison. PublicSource has a special page dedicated to our reporting on COVID-19 for the Pittsburgh region. See it here and sign up for our newsletter to stay informed. We hope you are following the news and, if your situation allows, social distancing guidelines .  Have a tip or an idea? Please email mila@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Oliver Morrison oliver@publicsource.org x Oliver reports on K-12 education for PublicSource. Before becoming a journalist, Oliver taught English and drama in the Arkansas Delta for seven years. He has previously written education features in New... More by Oliver Morrison