Posted in Equity , IN-DEPTH , Under the Keystone A Veteran’s Progress by Alexandra Kanik March 11, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Show/hide captions Jake Danna Stevens is a staff photographer at the Times-Tribune in Scranton, Pa. He began his studies in photography at Scranton High School and has a bachelor’s degree in photojournalism from Western Kentucky University. Earl Granville, of Scranton, Pa., is the second person featured in our Under the Keystone series. A veteran who lost his leg in Afghanistan and lost a brother to PTSD, he is now studying mental health counseling so he can help veterans and others who have come through difficult situations. His story and the photos appeared first in the Scranton Times-Tribune, one of our partner newspapers, in November. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Veterans affairs , Vulnerable populations