Posted in Daily report , posts June 3, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 3, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Excessive-force lawsuits settled with police Since 2010, the city has paid $4.9 million in civil rights-related police lawsuits. On Tuesday, two separate cases regarding the use of excessive force were settled. Pittsburgh: Uber poaches 40 Carnegie Mellon University employees The ride-sharing startup attracted six principal investigators and 34 engineers to a new Pittsburgh-based tech center, and now CMU’s National Robotics and Engineering Center is down to about half its former strength. Pittsburgh: Ride-sharing companies allowed at airport A new policy by the Allegheny County Airport Authority will offer three-year permits to ride-sharing companies for a security deposit and annual fee. Uber was the first to sign up. Previously, drivers were ticketed for not having authority to solicit passengers at the airport. Harrisburg: Gov. Wolf’s tax plan shut down unanimously Gov. Wolf’s plan would raise sales and income taxes but cut property taxes and increase education funding. When the bill went to the House Monday, it was rejected 193-0. The overwhelming rejection was considered a “stunt” and “gamesmanship” by supporters of the plan. Philadelphia: UPenn’s suicide rate five times higher than college average On Monday, the University of Pennsylvania’s seventh suicide victim in two years was found. Three of the victims were members of the track team. As a result, UPenn has been criticized for valuing achievement over well-being. York County: Woman allegedly stole $650,000 worth of photographs Steve McCurry is the photographer behind the iconic 1984 National Geographic cover, “The Afghan Girl,” and one of his employees, Bree DeStephano, used her position to steal rare prints from his studio. She was arrested and arraigned Tuesday. NATIONAL USA Freedom Act passes Senate The bill ends the NSA’s bulk collection of telephone data and implements an alternative transitional system that keeps the data in private hands until it’s needed. Access to the information can be obtained by court order. President Obama has indicated he will sign it. Man shot in Boston linked to Islamic extremists Usaama Rahim was under 24-hour surveillance by police and federal agents. He was confronted by FBI agents on Tuesday morning, when he was shot and killed for pulling a large military knife. FIFA president to resign Although recently re-elected for a fifth term, Sepp Blatter announced his resignation Tuesday because he’s been connected to the federal corruption investigation. IN OTHER NEWS Google smartclothes At Google’s annual developer conference, Google I/O, they introduced Project Jacquard and a partnership with Levi Strauss. They want to make conductive fabrics that can transmit data to phones and computers, and make it possible to send texts by swiping a jacket cuff. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.