Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan November 13, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Crude oil train derails outside of Philadelphia A train carrying crude oil derailed in a Norfolk Southern rail yard in King of Prussia on Friday morning. No spills or leaks have been reported. Wisconsin sees two derailments in one weekend A day after a BNSF train derailed in Wisconsin, spilling up to 20,000 gallons of ethanol into the Mississippi River, a second train traveling in the state on Nov. 8 sent 13 cars off the tracks in and leaked crude oil. There were no injuries in either accident. After weekend derailments, Wisconsin lawmakers introduce bill The proposed rail safety legislation would fund more rail safety inspectors and training for first responders and would require railroads to submit emergency prevention and response plans to the state. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Downed train caused by broken rail The Canadian Pacific crude oil train that derailed in Wisconsin on Nov. 8 was caused by a broken rail , according to company officials. Track failure is one of the leading causes of derailments. Keystone XL failure could mean more crude oil trains Analysts say rail shippers could eventually see a “modest boost” from the failed pipeline project, according to Energy & Environmental News . Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org or 412-315-0261. Follow her on Twitter @khantasha . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan