Posted in Uncategorized Double your impact: PublicSource is the only Western Pennsylvania newsroom selected for News Match 2017 by Natasha Khan October 10, 2017 January 16, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Dear readers, We’re thrilled to be the only Pittsburgh newsroom chosen to participate in this year’s News Match, which is a collaborative effort to support nonprofit news organizations by the Democracy Fund, the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation, and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. We invite you to double your impact in supporting meaningful public-service journalism in the Pittsburgh region. Please donate to PublicSource at publicsource.org/donate between now and Dec. 31, 2017, and your gifts up to $1,000 will be matched up to a total of $28,000. Your contribution will help pay for the important and costly work produced by the PublicSource newsroom each day. We are grateful that you continue to share our stories, send us tips and feedback and receive our weekly digest in your inbox. Just think how much we have accomplished in the past year: Like no other newsroom in the city, we have been focusing on inequities through our “I am a black girl and…” project; we’re dedicating time and reporting to the lead crisis in the city; we have investigated the school-to-prison pipeline; provided the most in-depth look at charter schools in Western Pennsylvania; and explored different aspects of life in small towns in the Pittsburgh region. We hosted at least a dozen events and attracted thousands of new readers. So, thank you for supporting our work. It wouldn’t have been possible without you. PublicSource participated in the Knight Foundation’s inaugural News Match in 2016, which helped 57 nonprofit news organizations raise more than $1.2 million in match donations. PublicSource received nearly $25,000 in donations from its #PublicSource100 campaign with matching funds from Knight Foundation. The continuation of the News Match initiative is exciting news. At a time when attacks against the media are unstoppable and trust in media is at an all-time low, PublicSource needs and appreciates the News Match initiative and your support. As a nonprofit newsroom, PublicSource depends on donations from the community to produce its public-service journalism. By donating to PublicSource during the News Match 2017, you can help ensure the Western Pennsylvania issues you care about get the coverage they deserve. We would be doubly grateful if you give now . News Match is the largest grassroots fundraising campaign to support nonprofit and investigative news organizations. More than 100 organizations are eligible to receive up to $28,000 each in matching funding for all individual donations up to $1,000. Donors can contribute between now and Dec. 31 at www.newsmatch.org —the first one-stop platform for donating to nonprofit news. Donations can also be made directly to participating newsrooms ( publicsource.org/donate ). PublicSource listens, investigates and reveals the untold stories of the Pittsburgh region. All news organizations participating in News Match must be members in good standing of the Institute for Nonprofit News. To be a member, an organization must be a 501(c)(3) or have a 501(c)3 fiscal sponsor, must be transparent about funding sources, and must produce investigative and/or public-service reporting. Donations are tax-deductible as allowed by law. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: donate , support our work , support us Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan