Posted in HEALTH A free panel on Alzheimer’s disease preparedness in Pennsylvania Join Spotlight PA in a free Q&A on Alzheimer’s disease in Pennsylvania and possible solutions to the coming crisis. by Spotlight PA Staff September 25, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Alice “Candy” Loughney, 71, has Alzheimer’s disease and moved into a long-term care facility in Monroeville after her symptoms became too much for her husband to manage. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki for Spotlight PA / PublicSource) There are 280,000 people in Pennsylvania over the age of 64 living with Alzheimer’s disease, the most common cause of dementia, and that number is expected to swell to 320,000 over the next four years. Yet, few state-licensed eldercare facilities have dementia-specific accommodations, nursing homes are short staffed, care costs are exceedingly high, and support is often incredibly thin, a recent Spotlight PA/ PublicSource investigation revealed. The result, advocates warn, is a perfect storm of limited resources against soaring needs, with many giving Pennsylvania a failing grade on its efforts to prepare. On Friday, Oct. 8 at noon , join Spotlight PA for a free panel on Alzheimer’s disease preparedness in Pennsylvania and possible solutions.. Our panelists include: Colin Deppen , reporter and newsletter editor for Spotlight PA Juliette Rihl , freelance reporter for PublicSource Clayton Jacobs , executive director of the Alzheimer’s Association Greater Pennsylvania Other panelists to be announced. RSVP for free here. Submit your questions in advance to events@spotlightpa.org. Spotlight PA’s events operate on a “pay-what-you-can” honor system . Crisis of Care stories: The coming crisis in dementia care and why Pa. is woefully unprepared ‘They’re totally consumed’: Pennsylvania’s Alzheimer’s and dementia caregivers need more help Pa. lawmakers know a dementia care crisis is coming. Will they agree on a response? Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI