Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts Sanders criticizes trade deals at Pittsburgh rally by Sbodon March 31, 2016 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X In front of thousands of lively supporters, including union workers, volunteers and students, Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders on Thursday shared his views on racial and gender equality, college tuition, environmental issues, LGBTQ rights and the economy. At the Pittsburgh event, the 74-year-old senator from Vermont focused heavily on free trade, an issue the campaign linked to regional jobs lost to competition in China and Mexico, notably at Allegheny Technologies, which laid off workers at two idled steel plants and GE Transportation in Erie, which has laid off hundreds of workers at its locomotive plant. “Over the last 35 years, our trade agreements have been rigged by corporate America to shut down manufacturing plants in Vermont, in Pennsylvania,” Sanders said in a press release . During the rally, Sanders said: When I came to Congress in the 1990s, I didn’t need a PhD to understand that these trade policies were written by corporate America for one very simple purpose. And that purpose was to not have to pay workers in this country a living wage. The purpose of these trade agreements was to enable them to shut down factories in Pennsylvania, in Vermont… Sanders criticized Democratic primary opponent Hillary Clinton’s use of Super PACs, describing the system as “corrupt and complex.” Sanders, in contrast, has funded his campaign with contributions by individual supporters who have on average contributed $27, the campaign said. In the 2008 Pennsylvania primary election , Clinton beat out President Barack Obama with 55 percent of the vote. Nationally, Clinton leads Sanders by roughly 200 pledged delegates, according to FiveThirtyEight . Sanders’s base largely consists of young, liberal and working class Democrats, while Clinton holds tight to minority groups and older and more moderate Democrats. In Pittsburgh, the first Bernie supporters to arrive late Wednesday were a mother and daughter who started a line at that would wrap around the David L. Lawrence Convention Center and through the parking garage. Doors for the event opened at 7:30 a.m. Sanders quickly headed to another rally in the Bronx, while local supporters here moved to his campaign office on the South Side to volunteer their time. Democrats and Republicans both hold primaries in Pennsylvania on April 26. According to FiveThirtyEight , Clinton is favored in the contest for 189 delegates. Donald Trump is favored by FiveThirtyEight in the Republican contest, with 71 delegates in play. Reach PublicSource intern Sabrina Bodon at sbodon@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI