Posted in Trump Impacts Tell us: How could Medicaid cuts affect you and your family? Congress is considering reducing spending on Medicaid, a move that could affect thousands in the Pittsburgh region. by Public Source June 30, 2025 June 30, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X More than 250,000 Allegheny County residents rely on Medicaid, a county official said this month . They could see changes or lose coverage depending on legislation moving through Congress this week (President Trump’s “ One Big Beautiful Bill Act ”). PublicSource is gathering stories from residents in the Pittsburgh region who rely on Medicaid for themselves or their families. If you’re worried, uncertain or already feeling the effects of changes to your coverage, we want to hear from you. We may publish responses to this form, along with personal information you choose to provide (but not contact information). You can also reach out directly to reporter Charlie Wolfson at charlie@publicsource.org . How do you or a family member rely on Medicaid? (Required) If you were to lose access to Medicaid, what would you do for health care coverage? (Required) Would proposed work requirements affect your or your family’s ability to keep Medicaid coverage? Name Age Neighborhood or Municipality Email Address Phone Δ Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow