Posted in Equity , HEALTH , Local Government , On the beat , posts State budget delays impacting public health efforts by Halle Stockton August 4, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The disagreements and delays in the state Capitol over the annual budget aren’t simply political games. Some believe it’s directly affecting the health and welfare of many Pennsylvanians. The 2015-16 state budget was vetoed by Gov. Tom Wolf on June 30, and the Democratic governor has not been able to find common ground with the Republican-controlled Legislature for more than a month now. The state physician general told The Harrisburg Patriot-News that the budget impasse is holding back the one tool — a prescription drug monitoring system — that could truly put a dent in the state’s rampant abuse of prescription drugs, opioids and heroin. The monitoring system would allow healthcare providers to see if a patient was recently prescribed certain medications. This would help to prevent ‘doctor shopping,’ which is when a person visits different doctors or the emergency room to obtain several prescriptions and then either use or sell the medications. “It will help us see if someone is doctor shopping or may be addicted to drugs,” said Physician General Dr. Rachel Levine. “It’s no miracle, but it’s very helpful. We just need the money for it.” The idea is that healthcare providers could intervene and encourage treatment with the information provided by the system. They wouldn’t just have to go off a gut feeling or just simply refuse prescribing, which leads some prescription drug abusers to the streets in search of heroin. Levine called the drug problem “the biggest health crisis in the state.” At least 2,488 Pennsylvanians died from a drug overdose last year, but Levine said that number is likely higher because there’s no centralized reporting system for coroners in the state. PublicSource also reported on the lack of uniformity among coroners when determining if someone died of a drug overdose. Nonprofit social services providers are also burdened by the stalemate in Harrisburg. Wolf recently acknowledged that the delays would cause financial problems for them. Wolf said on a Pittsburgh radio show that the money organizations borrow to patch the holes while they wait for funding to resume may not be reimbursed by the state either, according to an Associated Press story . Some providers, like those in child welfare and addiction counseling, say there will be delays and longer waiting lists because of this. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor “I want to make sure that the disruption is as little as possible, so I’ll continue to work on that,” Wolf said. “But … in the long run, all of us, including the social services agencies, have a vested interest in making sure we do the right thing for Pennsylvania and that’s what I’m focused on.” Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or at hstockton@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @HalleStockton . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Drug abuse and rehabilitation , Economy , Non-profits , Poverty , State oversight of health and welfare systems Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton