Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource wins international journalism award for general excellence by PublicSource contributor October 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource won first place for general excellence in the micro newsroom category in the annual competition honoring best work in digital journalism by the Online News Association (ONA). South China Morning Post received the award in the large newsroom category, San Francisco Chronicle for medium newsrooms and The Marshall Project for small newsrooms. Each newsroom will receive a $5,000 prize thanks to SmartNews. Because of the coronavirus pandemic, winners were announced virtually on Friday during ONA20 Everywhere, a global journalism innovation festival. According to ONA, more than 1,800 attendees from 40 countries joined the ONA’s first fully virtual conference that took place Oct. 1-16. Finalists and winners of ONA awards across 19 different categories represent “high-quality works that push innovation in the field, while engaging audiences with key information to ensure their well-being and survival.” PublicSource has been previously nominated twice for the general excellence award. While PublicSource does not measure its impact in awards, we recognize the importance of celebrating the work of journalists and partners who have been working with PublicSource. It’s also an opportunity to thank people who trusted our journalists with their stories and those who have been counting on us to keep the Pittsburgh region informed. PublicSource relies on donations from our readers. For those of you who support our journalism financially, thank you. And for those who don’t yet, please consider becoming a member with a donation that helps to ensure the future of local journalism in Pittsburgh. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI