Posted in HEALTH , Inside our Newsroom , posts Video: Reporting on youth suicide in Allegheny County for PublicSource by Natasha Khan July 22, 2016 January 8, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X On July 21, PublicSource published a story about youth suicide in Allegheny County. From 2011 to early July 2016, 108 people ages 13 to 24 took their own lives in the county. S uicide is the third leading cause of death for young people in the country. Reporter Mary Niederberger speaks about how she was affected by her reporting and what she hopes people will take away from the story. She also talks about the special considerations she and PublicSource Managing Editor Halle Stockton took when deciding how to present the story because of its sensitive subject matter. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan