Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts This nifty digital tool translates air pollution to secondhand smoke by Natasha Khan October 21, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X If you were hanging around Pittsburgh over the last 24 hours, the amount of air pollution you were exposed to is equal to spending about 40 minutes in a car with a smoker. That’s according to Share My Air , an interactive tool that uses real-time air quality data from cities and converts it to something more relatable: secondhand smoke. “Americans in communities across the United States inhale air pollution on a daily basis, but they may not understand exactly what they are being exposed to,” said Kevin Kononenko, who created the tool while studying environmental science at the University of Michigan. Kononenko’s digital tool pulls fine particle pollution (PM 2.5) data from EPA’s AirNow database , which provides hourly air quality measurements from cities nationwide. Kononenko provides links on his site to peer-reviewed articles he used to justify comparing fine particles in ambient air to those in secondhand smoke. Despite the air being better than it was a generation ago, Pittsburgh still has some of the worst air quality in the country. Allegheny County still fails to meet federal standards for fine particle pollution (PM 2.5) and ground-level ozone, or smog. Fine particles come from many sources, including burning fossil fuels and other industrial activities. These particles are dangerous because they can enter people’s lungs and bloodstream and cause serious health problems, including heart disease and respiratory issues. While getting his degree in Ann Arbor, Mich., Kononenko spoke to a number of parents in the city who were concerned about their children’s exposure to secondhand smoke. He did more research and found that scientists were measuring cigarette smoke in PM 2.5, just like ambient air pollution. Kononenko then decided he could create a tool that compared the two and maybe help people better understand what their kids are exposed to on a daily basis. The tool is part of Vivergy , Kononenko’s larger project that allows people to measure their personal impact on air pollution and take steps to limit it. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan