Posted in Community storytelling The Glimpse: ‘Romance under the rivers,’ a poetic look at Pittsburgh’s three rivers Visuals intern Anastasia Busby partnered with nature enthusiast Ash Andrews to create poetry inspired by Pittsburgh’s rivers. by Anastasia Busby May 9, 2025 May 11, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pittsburgh’s river triad quickly sparked fascination after my move here several months ago. Intrigued by the coal barges and long trains that traveled along the Monongahela, I needed to learn more about the rivers and their relationship to the city. In January, the rivers froze over and created a memorable icy-blue scene foreign to me as a California native. The most beautiful Pittsburgh sunset I’ve seen came while I was sitting on the steps of the Point State Park fountain, where the Monongahela and Allegheny meet. What I love most about the rivers is how they flow through the city in spite of it. These rivers are a force of nature and should be treated as such. I partnered with Ash Andrews, who works to get people out on the rivers as CEO and president of Venture Outdoors. I asked Andrews to write a poem about the rivers to which I would match video footage. Romance Under the Rivers Who will know I’ve navigated these rivers? who will feel my wake on their skin taste my wake on their tongue speak my wake on their breath Will my wake feel like rage to the red tailed hawk gliding above Taste like fear to the catfish and trout mingling on the riverbed below Sound like spite to the river otter rolling and diving without care And what of my ripping through still water bow pressing through headwaters forcing backfill against gravity What of that strike, that splitting of peace tailwaters turned transverse in disarray What of my wake then? Orion pulling out from celestial belt loops Milky Way spilling onto the Allegheny River Night river paddle through the eternals The ecology of the three rivers forever changed by my childish tributaries and selfish deltas Or shall I instead stay still? My silent spring silent moored up at the dock with a tight midshipman’s hitch d-ring to the sea-wall ebb and flowing in place Wind and current straining only as far as chained radius allows Will they only remember my wake for the spring they saw? but what of my watershed What of my pilings and what of my barge, my gangplank, my stern What of my frivolous fireflies, my ravenous damselflies, my couple of dobsonflies on the side My steady dryad’s saddle and occasional turkey tail, my hopeful trillium and persistent knotweed What of those? Will they remember my wild carrot as poison hemlock, my North Star as Venus, Cooper’s hawk for turkey vulture, eclipse as new moon? Will the trout remember the feel of my wake on their soft dorsal fin? Land acknowledgment : Pittsburgh and the three rivers, the Ohio, Monongahela and Allegheny, are located on the ancestral lands of the Adena, Hopewell, Monongahela, Delaware, Shawnee and Osage Peoples. Anastasia Busby is a photojournalist with PublicSource who can be reached at anastasia@publicsource.org and on Instagram @abuzzbee_photography . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow