Posted in DATA , Education , PUBLIC SAFETY Pennsylvania Vaccine Data by Eric Holmberg August 29, 2015 October 11, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource examined eight years of Pennsylvania immunization data at the county level and one year at the school level for this project on vaccination rates of school children. Previous to our project, this data from the Pennsylvania Department of Health was in a static format. We’ve made it available for you to explore for the first time. Our interactive data visualization will allow you to discover the vaccination rates across four major vaccines, including measles, as well as how many students are exempt from vaccines in your local elementary and middle schools. You can also download our spreadsheets to explore the county or school data for yourself. Using the map Each dot represents an elementary school that when clicked on shows you the school name and address, the number of kindergarteners enrolled, and the percent of the kindergartners who are vaccinated for four major vaccines. The dots representing the schools are color-coded to the measles vaccination rate of the kindergarteners at that school. A green dot is a school where at least 95 percent of the kindergarteners are vaccinated for measles, which constitutes herd immunity . A yellow dot is a school with an 80 to 94 percent measles immunization rate, which puts it below the herd immunity threshold. But, the school is still above 80 percent — the rate that generated a widespread measles outbreak in the FRED measles simulation . A red dot represents a school that has less than 80 percent of its kindergarteners vaccinated against measles, which is below the outbreak scenario in the FRED measles simulation . Let us know when you find something interesting in the map or in the data! FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Care of children and elderly , Data