Her Story In this black-or-white world, I want to find the gray area Tiara Tabb, age, 15, Homestead July 3, 2017 Tiara Tabb in the hallways of Propel Andrew Street High School. (Photo by Njaimeh Njie/PublicSource) Tiara Tabb wrote this poem as an original expression of how she views herself and her interactions with others. She said she believes that so many people see the world in black-or-white terms, both literally and figuratively. Tiara said she wants to find the gray — a middle ground where people can find commonalities and understanding. She sees this as a challenge in her personal relationships and in how people view her. Who Am I? I am something seen, but very hidden – unknown, I may seem one way but I’m completely different at home, I may be with a lot of people, but I’m somewhat alone, I’m too unemotional that I don’t understand how far I’ve gone, But I’m not weak – I’m still standing strong, I’m happy and glad that I survived instead, Always honest about who I am, I’ll give you the black and the white, but don’t forget the gray, I might be blunt and harsh sometimes, But my passion comes out at the best of times, But every once in awhile, I will take your feelings into account, But I can’t promise it won’t hurt if you ever find out, So instead of just giving you the black and white, I’ll give you the gray every day. Tiara Tabb is a rising sophomore who often expresses herself through poetry. Their Stories Tyneisha continues quest to prove herself as a parent with a disability, but she could still lose her son ‘Young Black Pittsburgh’ ambassadors connect with the girls who shared their stories through letters The vicious cycle inside Allegheny County juvenile court for black girls and their mothers. I saw it up close. Jayla Wright: Relationships can tear you down and lift you up. 360 Video: Priya is a teen roboticist interested in how robots can revolutionize medicine Tyneisha thinks her disability shouldn’t disqualify her from motherhood Being 16: Janae turns to poetry to make art out of struggle Shaunese Johnson: Schools teach the same black history over and over. Students deserve better. Pittsburgh has a severe shortage of black teachers and that’s hurting black students. Tamia Law: Living in Clairton: ‘Nobody really cares unless it is football’ Getting in the game: Physical activity is a win-win for black girls Pittsburgh’s black girls face lots of inequity barriers. Advocates want tangible change. Corrine Jasmin: They say I’m pretty — for a black girl. Dezmaire gave birth in eighth grade. As a teen mom in Pittsburgh, she’s fighting to beat the odds and graduate. Maia Ervin: I am black, I am a student, and I’m tired of racism on my campus Zoe Vongtau: ‘I hid my accent and culture. I was just always the new black girl.’ She lost her mom and her home. How Monet is finding a promising future in Pittsburgh. 11-year-old Keliyah wants to be a lawyer, sings a special song If everyone got screened, gifted education in Pittsburgh could be more equitable. School officials aren’t sold. When some students are labeled as gifted, I see the harm done to those left behind Who gets to be considered ‘gifted’ in Pittsburgh schools?  Too few black girls. Donise Griffin: Why don’t more students at Pittsburgh’s Gifted Center look like me? Videos: Six women speak about the outlook for black girls in Pittsburgh Do black girls pay a higher price when comprehensive sex education isn’t taught? Amariah Woodson: Racism can be difficult to prove, but I think it happened to me Sienna Rodriguez-Truley: The parts of me that can’t be mixed and matched There are ways to end the school-to-prison pipeline Relive the Gwen’s Girls Equity Summit through what was discussed on social media Gwen’s Girls summit highlights how suspensions derail black girls’ education A story of two girls: Why being black means more scrutiny and punishment in Pittsburgh schools How institutions and society fail Pittsburgh’s black girls