Posted in NEWS Rosfeld found not guilty on all counts of criminal homicide in Antwon Rose’s death by J. Dale Shoemaker March 22, 2019 March 23, 2019 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Dozens of people, including Christian Carter (center), gathered outside the Allegheny County Courthouse Friday night after a jury found former East Pittsburgh police officer Michael Rosfeld not guilty in the June 19 fatal shooting of Antwon Rose II. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Former East Pittsburgh police officer Michael Rosfeld has been found not guilty in the June 19 fatal shooting of Antwon Rose II. Rosfeld, who was charged with criminal homicide, killed Rose in a traffic stop. Rose, 17, was unarmed. Dozens gathered outside the courthouse in the half hour after the verdict to demonstrate in support of Rose. Christian Carter, a youth organizer, read a poem written by Rose before leading the group in a chant calling for justice. Rosfeld’s attorney Patrick Thomassey described his client as a “good man” and said the case had nothing to do with race. “I feel horrible for the family,” Thomassey said. “Both families here.” Thomassey said Rosfeld did as he was trained and was responding to a call for a nearby shooting. The vehicle Rose traveled in was linked to the shooting in North Braddock, but county prosecutors said that Rose was not involved. Related: Read Pittsburgh artist Vanessa German’s poems for Antwon In closing arguments Friday afternoon, Assistant District Attorney Jonathan Fodi said Rosfeld acted as “judge, jury and executioner” when he shot Rose. “Sometimes teenagers run. Is it foolish? Yes. Does it deserve death? No,” Fodi said. “It’s not OK to run from a traffic stop but it’s also not OK to shoot someone who does.” Outside the courthouse, a crowd of protesters shouted: “Three shots in the back, how you justify that?” State Rep. Summer Lee (D-Swissvale) spoke out against the verdict. “Realistically, we need juries to understand that police officers, however valuable we think they are, however we believe that they are heroes — they are humans also,” she said. “They make mistakes. And sometimes their mistakes lead to children being killed.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Lee said lawmakers need to create a system to track police firings and misconduct so it is available to the public and other police departments. Before being hired in East Pittsburgh, Rosfeld had resigned from the University of Pittsburgh Police Department under the threat of termination. Rose’s family filed a lawsuit against Pitt in December for not disclosing his record. State Rep. Summer Lee speaks to media after former East Pittsburgh police officer Michael Rosfeld was found not guilty of criminal homicide. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Randall Taylor, a Pittsburgh City Council candidate for District 9, said an Allegheny County jury should have decided on the verdict, not one from Dauphin County, which he described as “Trump country.” He said he believed Rosfeld acted recklessly and should have been convicted of involuntary manslaughter at the least. “We are outraged. Our people are hurting. From our seniors to our young. People are hurting behind this verdict.” Allegheny County District Attorney Stephen Zappala Jr. said in a statement he disagrees with the verdict but that a jury that represents the people of the commonwealth has spoken. “In the interest of justice, we must continue to do our job of bringing charges in situations where charges are appropriate, regardless of the role an individual holds in the community,” Zappala said in the statement. Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto wrote on Twitter that he grieves with Rose’s family, friends and the community. “Words cannot heal the pain so many are feeling. Only action can begin the process, a process that will take work & understanding,” Peduto wrote in a tweet. J. Dale Shoemaker is PublicSource’s government and data reporter. You can reach him at 412-515-0060 or by email at dale@publicsource.org . You can follow him on Twitter at @JDale_Shoemaker. He can be reached securely via PGP: bit.ly/2ig07qL Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram