Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource calls for 30 supporters to sustain independent journalism through monthly gifts Help carry our journalism forward; we’ll help you carry your stuff. For a limited time, get our beautiful tote bag with any monthly gift. by Alyia Paulding March 11, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Until March 24, 2024, our zip-top tote is available to anyone starting a monthly donation of any amount. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) PublicSource is seeking 30 champions for local journalism to begin a monthly gift over the next two weeks, and we’re hoping you’ll be one of them. Whether you used to subscribe to other local news sources, but now rely on PublicSource for information or have always had us as a key part of your news diet, now is the time to support the independent, fact-checked journalism you value. Why are we asking for you to step up with a monthly gift? Recurring monthly gifts help to insulate our newsroom against rising costs . They sustain access to our stories for everyone who can benefit from them , regardless of their ability to contribute financially. And they protect our ability to cover emerging issues our readers need to know about. Just over the last month, we’ve published investigations into how local universities invest their billions (in often opaque and controversial ways) and the actions of the nation’s largest natural gas producer, EQT . It is through the support of our donors that we can dig into these critical topics. Your support will allow us to continue this work in 2024 and beyond. PublicSource’s member tote bag. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Your membership definitely benefits our region, and there are benefits for you, too. Becoming a monthly member will get you access to our exclusive member newsletter, which includes reflections from our staff, interesting notes from the field, event announcements and more. And we’re excited to share a special benefit. Our beautiful, functional zip-top tote is normally available only for those who give $75 or more per year. Until March 24, 2024, the tote bag is available to those starting a monthly donation of any amount. Our tote bag features a design by local artist and frequent PublicSource contributor Andrea Shockling. We love the way it represents different walks of life for Pittsburgh residents, much like our journalism does, and we hope you’ll love it, too. Get yours — start a monthly gift today! Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow Alyia Paulding alyia@publicsource.org Alyia (they/she) is the Director of Membership and Development at PublicSource, working to establish and nurture relationships with donors and funders. Before joining PublicSource in 2020, Alyia worked... More by Alyia Paulding