In-Depth Reporting The vicious cycle inside Allegheny County juvenile court for black girls and their mothers. I saw it up close. By Jennifer Price August 2, 2017 Jennifer Price is a former assistant district attorney in Allegheny County. Now, she is a special education and criminal defense lawyer. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) A typical day in the family courthouse consists of hallways filled with parents and children, all waiting anxiously to have their cases heard. Family dynamics can play a significant role in why a juvenile is actually in the juvenile court system, but they also have a strong influence on what occurs inside the courtroom. It’s heartbreaking enough to see a child looking around to see no relatives around. Even worse is when a family member shows up only to ensure the youth doesn’t go home with them. On those days, I, as a former assistant district attorney in Allegheny County, would glimpse into the lives of broken families. These stories were prevalent, but the most devastating to me were those involving female juvenile offenders. Of course, it wasn’t lost on me that the girls I’m referring to in these situations were practically all black, like me. The sounds of hearing a grandmother tell a judge, “I don’t know where she can go, but she can’t come home with me,” or a simple, “No,” to the inquiry of whether she can go home doesn’t leave you when you leave the courthouse. Then, there were the girls who identified as LGBT and were not “accepted” back home because of their sexual or gender orientation. One mother stated that her daughter knew she didn’t agree with “that stuff,” and she couldn’t come home until she changed. These stories tend to be more crushing mainly because, unlike some of the boys who were still trying to show bravado, tears from both mother and daughter filled the room. With the exception of the mother who stated her lesbian daughter couldn’t go home until she “changed,” the mothers in the courtroom were crying nonstop as they exhibited a form of tough love on their daughters. Tissue boxes were readily available. Through all the emotions the daughters were feeling, however, I don’t think the girls understood the parent’s actions as tough love. The girls would ask through tears, “Why don’t you want me? What did I do? Why can’t I come home?” This lack of understanding only added to the feelings of rejection the girls may have already had. Jennifer Price talks about the broken family structures she saw in juvenile court. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) In some ways, I could empathize with the mothers. They were usually single mothers, doing their best. Unfortunately, their best didn’t appear to be good enough. It hadn’t been too long since I’d been a single mother. I have a daughter who is around the same age as the girls in the courtroom. I knew what they were dealing with, in terms of having a daughter going through puberty. I know when you’re a young mother especially, typical issues with children can be intensified by the drama that come with youth and motherhood. I was just lucky to have opportunities not available to them. Related: How hundreds of kids get arrested in Pittsburgh schools every year For starters, I had significant family support that allowed me to finish both my undergraduate and law school degrees, so I did not have to work more than one job. I never took that assistance for granted. There were a few times, I remember thinking, that with one or two different decisions I, too, could have been in a juvenile courtroom. I say that to emphasize that I think it only takes a few missteps to begin the domino effect that can lead you down the wrong path. Those one or two wrong decisions may not land you in court, but they could open the door to the cyclical nature of the juvenile justice system. For example, if tardiness or truancy was an issue at school, sometimes you’d hear mothers in the courtroom talking about how they have to leave for work before their daughter gets on the bus. So the mom expected the daughter to be mature enough to get on the bus and go to school on her own, or listen to an older sibling. I had a similar experience at one time. For a period of about six months or so, when I first started working at the District Attorney’s Office, I was assigned to handle summary appeals cases, mostly minor traffic offenses. In order to get there early enough to organize the files and talk to officers about the cases, I had to get to work by 8 a.m. — leaving before my daughter got on the bus. I sought help from two different neighbors whose kids also rode the bus with my daughter to make sure she still attended school. Then, I eventually made the decision that I was not going to get to the courthouse by 8 a.m. I had the flexibility in my job to make that decision without it affecting my position or compromising my overall job security. The mothers I saw in the courtroom did not have that luxury. They had to get to work on time, without question, in order to get a paycheck. Some of the mothers worked hourly jobs, where every minute literally counted and reflected in their paychecks. Related: Police leadership and training can stop criminalization of youth. We’re making progress in Philadelphia. Not once did I question whether the parents in the courtroom loved their children, but they all had the same facial expressions. Exhaustion from working two or three jobs only to be met with the sporadic emotions of a young person. Sometimes, the expression read, “I am overwhelmed.” Parenting doesn’t come with a handbook, and you can only teach what you know. Nevertheless, from a prosecutor’s perspective, you were certain you would see that juvenile again. That her negative behavior would be reinforced when she turns around and sees either no one in the galley or someone who doesn’t want her anymore. Rejection becomes the foundation for anger and resentment. They build up, and the cycle of problems continue. As a mother, I could see pain and frustration from both the mothers and daughters in the room. Neither could understand how they got there or how to move on. I wasn’t really sure how to either, knowing that the next day I would quite possibly see it all over again. Jennifer Price is a special education and criminal defense lawyer who advocates for people’s civil rights and constitutional rights. She can be reached at 724-519-7587. Their Stories Tyneisha continues quest to prove herself as a parent with a disability, but she could still lose her son ‘Young Black Pittsburgh’ ambassadors connect with the girls who shared their stories through letters Tiara Tabb: In this black-or-white world, I want to find the gray area Jayla Wright: Relationships can tear you down and lift you up. 360 Video: Priya is a teen roboticist interested in how robots can revolutionize medicine Tyneisha thinks her disability shouldn’t disqualify her from motherhood Being 16: Janae turns to poetry to make art out of struggle Shaunese Johnson: Schools teach the same black history over and over. Students deserve better. Pittsburgh has a severe shortage of black teachers and that’s hurting black students. Tamia Law: Living in Clairton: ‘Nobody really cares unless it is football’ Getting in the game: Physical activity is a win-win for black girls Pittsburgh’s black girls face lots of inequity barriers. Advocates want tangible change. Corrine Jasmin: They say I’m pretty — for a black girl. Dezmaire gave birth in eighth grade. As a teen mom in Pittsburgh, she’s fighting to beat the odds and graduate. Maia Ervin: I am black, I am a student, and I’m tired of racism on my campus Zoe Vongtau: ‘I hid my accent and culture. I was just always the new black girl.’ She lost her mom and her home. How Monet is finding a promising future in Pittsburgh. 11-year-old Keliyah wants to be a lawyer, sings a special song If everyone got screened, gifted education in Pittsburgh could be more equitable. School officials aren’t sold. When some students are labeled as gifted, I see the harm done to those left behind Who gets to be considered ‘gifted’ in Pittsburgh schools?  Too few black girls. Donise Griffin: Why don’t more students at Pittsburgh’s Gifted Center look like me? Videos: Six women speak about the outlook for black girls in Pittsburgh Do black girls pay a higher price when comprehensive sex education isn’t taught? Amariah Woodson: Racism can be difficult to prove, but I think it happened to me Sienna Rodriguez-Truley: The parts of me that can’t be mixed and matched There are ways to end the school-to-prison pipeline Relive the Gwen’s Girls Equity Summit through what was discussed on social media Gwen’s Girls summit highlights how suspensions derail black girls’ education A story of two girls: Why being black means more scrutiny and punishment in Pittsburgh schools How institutions and society fail Pittsburgh’s black girls