Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts The week in Marcellus Shale news by swalsh January 28, 2012 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X People often ask if PublicSource has a particular interest in Marcellus Shale. After all, we run a lot of stories about it from our regional partners and shared sources. The answer is that it’s a local story, a state story and a national story that’s important to our economy, our energy policy, our environment. So it’s important to pay attention. It’s been a busy time for consumers of news about Marcellus Shale. President Obama talked about it in his State-of-the-Union speech, saying natural gas could fuel America for 100 years. The federal government downgraded the amount of recoverable fuel in the Marcellus Shale formation. Consol Energy, Chesapeake Energy and EQT Corp., among other companies, said the low price of natural gas meant they would cut back on the number of wells they’re drilling in Pennsylvania. Pittsburgh’s WQED did an hour-long broadcast about the shale industry in the state. National Public Radio’s ‘On Point’ spent an hour talking about various forms of energy, including natural gas, with host Tom Ashbrook asking: “Are we blundering into energy independence?” We connect you to all the stories here, and you can also comment on PublicSource. Related links: Where did all the shale gas go? | The Allegheny Front Does America have the juice? | OnPoint US set to require disclosure from ‘frackers’ | Financial Times Shale drillers see slowdown as natural gas prices decline | Pittsburgh Post-Gazette Why the clean tech boom went bust | Wired Managing Macellus: Energy and economic impact | WQED FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.