Posted in HEALTH Tell us: We want to hear from you about abortion rights and restrictions. Pennsylvania’s 2022 race for governor could be pivotal for the future of local abortion rights as the Supreme Court appears poised to strike down Roe v. Wade. How are you being impacted? by TyLisa C. Johnson May 3, 2022 September 7, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photo illustration by Natasha Vicens/PublicSource) Editor’s note: The Supreme Court of the United States overturned Roe v. Wade on June 24. ( Read our coverage here. ) Abortions remain legal in Pennsylvania as of July 2022. We’d still like to hear your thoughts and stories about abortion rights and restrictions. Please use the form below! Roe v. Wade has been the law of the land since 1973, establishing the right to end a pregnancy. A May 2 POLITICO report , however, shared a leaked draft of a Supreme Court opinion that would strike down the nearly 50-year-old law. What does that mean for Pennsylvania? Gov. Tom Wolf, a clear supporter of abortion rights, has said he would support abortion access by vetoing anti-abortion bills . But in recent months, he said that likely wouldn’t be enough without the federal protection from Roe v. Wade. Not to mention that Wolf will leave office in early 2023. [What does that mean for you? Share your story with us. See form below for more details .] Nearly two dozen states are anticipated to ban or severely restrict abortion if Roe v. Wade is overturned, according to the Guttmacher Institute , a research group in favor of abortion rights. The percent of women who may drive to Pennsylvania for abortion care following a total ban in nearby states is expected to grow by more than 1,000% , according to the Guttmacher Institute. Members of Pennsylvania’s General Assembly have pushed forward six different anti-abortion bills since 2016, which have remained unsuccessful, though three made it to Wolf’s desk. Should Pennsylvania elect a Republican governor in 2022, it’s possible the commonwealth would see more restrictive laws enacted . PublicSource wants to explore how women, womxn and families are being impacted by the looming Supreme Court decision and governor’s race. We understand that this can be a deeply personal discussion, but we also believe there’s power in sharing your perspective and in elevating the voices of those with direct experiences. We want to hear from you about abortion rights and restrictions in PA. Roe v. Wade was overturned on June 24. What do you think the impact will be on your community? We encourage you to be specific, either to your personal situation or highlighting services that may see a change in demand. What questions do you have about Roe v. Wade or abortion access that you feel haven’t been answered? What’s missing from the conversation on the local level? Do you have a personal experience related to pregnancy or abortion that you want to share in the context of the Roe v. Wade conversation? Name (Required) Email (We won’t publish or share this information. A reporter may use it to follow up with you.) (Required) Location Age Sign up for PublicSource's free newsletter Δ Read more: After a shift in Supreme Court balance, states like Pennsylvania could become the new abortion rights battleground Read more: How PA could be impacted by the SCOTUS ruling Originally published March 3, 2022. Updated May 3, 2022. Jourdan Hicks is PublicSource’s senior community correspondent. She can be reached at Jourda n@publicsource.org or on Facebook @Jourdan Hicks . TyLisa C. Johnson is the audience engagement editor for PublicSource. She can be reached at tylisa@publicsource.org or on Twitter at @tylisawrites . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI TyLisa C. Johnson tylisa@publicsource.org x TyLisa C. Johnson is the Audience Engagement Editor at PublicSource. She’s passionate about telling compelling human stories that intersect with complex issues affecting marginalized groups. Before joining... More by TyLisa C. Johnson