Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts Eakin’s resignation won’t fix Pennsylvania Supreme Court woes by PublicSource contributor March 16, 2016 November 19, 2019 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Following the resignation of Pennsylvania Supreme Court Justice J. Michael Eakin, discussion is turning to how the governor will choose his replacement and what that means for the state’s highest court. Eakin’s resignation, stemming from a scandal involving inappropriate and offensive emails, leaves an open spot on the heavily Democratic state Supreme Court. Currently, there are five Democratic judges, one Republican and one vacant spot on the court . Eakin is a Republican. The decision to fill the vacant spot on the state Supreme Court is in the hands of Gov. Tom Wolf, who said in a statement he will make a selection in “due time.” Last November, as a result of two resignations and one election campaign, Wolf selected three new Democratic judges. Terry Madonna, director of Franklin and Marshall College’s Center for Politics and Political Affairs, told PennLive , that historically, governors replace a judge with another judge of the same party. Madonna is not sure that Wolf will follow the historical precedent for selecting Eakin’s replacement. “We’ll have to wait and see what Wolf does,” Madonna told PennLive . “He’ll have to reach a compromise with the Republicans, but given what’s going on in Harrisburg right now and all the tension and the discord, all bets are off on the things we’d normally predict.” Regardless of who is selected, Bruce Ledewitz, a Duquesne law professor, told PennLive , the new judge and all current and future judges should use this email scandal as a warning call. “All the political elites are now aware that their private relationships are public and that’s a good thing,” Ledewitz told PennLive . “At least for a time, I think you’ll have much more circumspection about ‘What I say and to whom I say it.’” Eakin was originally accused of receiving pornographic and offensive emails by Attorney General Kathleen Kane in November 2014. It became public in October . Wolf, who called on Eakin to resign in December, said in a statement the “continued abuse of public trust” was unacceptable. “Today is another reminder of why we must all work with urgency to restore the public’s trust in their government as well as the integrity of the judicial system,” Wolf said in a statement. The domino effect of Kane’s internal investigation of the state government that led to the release of the scandalous emails may not be over. For Eakin, “legal peril” is still a possibility, according to Chief Justice Ron Castille. Castille told the Allentown Morning Call that since Robert Garci, who led the probe, was Eakin’s campaign manager and there are allegations of attempts to “appoint an Eakin sympathizer to the conduct board,” Eakin will remain under scrutiny. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Reach PublicSource intern Lauren Rosenblatt at lrosenblatt@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @ LRosenblatt_ . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI