Posted in IN-DEPTH , Uncategorized , Under the Keystone Horsing Around: Tyler Stillings by Alexandra Kanik April 20, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Show/hide captions Tyler Stillings of Washington, Pa., is the latest in our series of profiles about interesting characters around the state. Stillings, a graduate of Duquesne University in Pittsburgh, never wanted to do anything but work with horses, as his mother and grandfather did. He trains and drives about 20 horses at his own stables and at the Meadows Racetrack and Casino in Washington County, Pa. These photos and video first appeared in the Washington Observer-Reporter , a media partner of PublicSource. Katie Roupe is a photojournalist for the Washington Observer-Reporter and a graduate of Kent State University. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI