Posted in NEWS PARTNERS Green adventures: Your family-friendly guide to Pittsburgh’s Earth Month events The city’s museums, zoo and parks host a slate of programming this month to teach kids about environmental science and  stewardship. by Aakanksha Agarwal April 2, 2024 April 4, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photo courtesy of the Carnegie Museum of Art) This story was originally published by Kidsburgh.org , a media partner of PublicSource. Kidsburgh is an online resource for families that highlights stories about the people, organizations and events making Pittsburgh a better place to raise all kids. Sign up for Kidsburgh’s free e-newsletter. As April rolls in with beautiful blooms and Earth Day inches closer, Pittsburgh comes alive with a month-long celebration dedicated to our incredible planet. From thrilling zoo adventures to thought-provoking art exhibitions, eco-conscious events are popping up all over the city, inviting families to join in the fun while making a positive impact on the world around them. Let’s dive into the Earth Month festivities and discover how Pittsburgh is leading the charge in environmental awareness and conservation. Pittsburgh Zoo & Aquarium Get ready to roar with excitement at the Pittsburgh Zoo’s Wild Earth Day celebration on Saturday, April 20, from 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. It’s a day filled with live music, captivating art and interactive educational booths, all dedicated to honoring our amazing planet and discovering ways to help it thrive. Organizations like Starbucks, 412 Food Rescue and Tree Pittsburgh will be there to share insights on sustainability and conservation. It’s an adventure for the whole family! Election 2024 Pa. House Republicans seek to move voter ID bill forward A Republican spokesperson said a discharge petition resolution was circulated Monday in the House. Carnegie Museum of Art Head over to the Carnegie Museum of Art for an eye-opening exhibition called Everlasting Plastics , running all month and through July 21. At the Carnegie Lab, dive into the fascinating world of plasticity with interactive activities like “Plastic Stack” and “Painting with Plastics,” where kids can unleash their creativity while learning about the importance of recycling and upcycling. It’s a unique opportunity for young minds to rethink our reliance on plastics and discover sustainable alternatives. (Carnegie Lab is open 4 – 7 p.m. on Thursdays and 11 a.m – 4 p.m. on Saturdays in the Scaife Lounge. Activities are free with admission. No registration required.) (Photo courtesy of the Children’s Museum of Pittsburgh) Children’s Museum of Pittsburgh At the Children’s Museum, young explorers can explore the galaxy with the Makeshop: journey to outer space event, running through April. Use recycled materials to build large-scale sculptures of planets, design a spaceship and learn how tools are used to explore the universe. Education What proposed performance-based funding could mean for Pitt, other state-related universities The performance-based funding model proposed by Gov. Josh Shapiro would tie state support for Penn State, Pitt, Temple and Lincoln to metrics such as graduation rates or retention. Pittsburgh Parks Conservancy The good folks over at the Pittsburgh Parks Conservancy are pulling out all the stops to celebrate throughout April . Join in the festivities at Westinghouse Park (Saturday, April 6)  and McKinley Park (Saturday, April 20), where families can enjoy games, music, nature crafts, and more. From solar-powered interactive fun to story hikes exploring the wonders of the natural world, there’s something for everyone to enjoy while giving back to our planet. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Mr. McSlithers, the Eastern Rat Snake. (Photo courtesy of Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh) ​​Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh For bookworms and science enthusiasts, the Carnegie Library through its various locations offers a lineup of engaging events throughout April. On April 13, meet Mr. McSlithers, the Eastern Rat Snake, offering an up-close look at snake habitats and adaptations. Then, on April 3, 17 and 30, dive into the fascinating world of water chemistry with the Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority: Color-Changing Chemistry events. Don your scientist hat and experiment with colorful potions and learn about water treatment and conservation. (Photo courtesy of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh) Additionally, don’t miss the Seed Exchange event on April 16 and 23, where you can exchange seeds, learn gardening tips and participate in composting demos to kickstart your garden this spring. Equity PPG, Rosedale Tech encourage women to enter male-dominated careers Pittsburgh firms and trade schools are trying to close the gender gap plaguing STEM and related fields. Achieving this will, their leaders say, elevate women and improve company performances. Dirt Day at East End Food Co-op Get your hands dirty at the East End Food Co-op’s Dirt Day on Saturday, April 13, from 10:00 a.m. – 3:00 p.m. Exchange seeds, learn gardening tips from experts, and participate in composting demos to kickstart your garden this spring. It’s a day of community, learning and green-thumb fun for all ages. PDP Night Market Goes Green Wrap up Earth Month in style at the PDP Night Market Goes Green in Market Square on Friday, April 26, from 5:00 – 10:00 p.m. Discover eco-friendly vendors, indulge in delicious food and drinks, and groove to live music under the stars. It’s a vibrant celebration of sustainability and community spirit, made possible by The Green Voice, Pittsburgh Earth Day and the Pittsburgh Downtown Partnership. African penguins swim and play in their pool at the National Aviary. (Photo by Mike Faix) The National Aviary The National Aviary welcomes curious minds to discover the wonders of nature. Join the flock at the Aviary for a celebration of feathered friends during Penguin-Palooza on April 27 – 28. In honor of World Penguin Day, families can get up close and personal with African Penguins, participate in fun feeding sessions and try their hands at penguin-themed crafts. Education The SAT test is going digital. Here’s what you need to know. Experts still aren’t sure if the shorter, adaptive exam — beginning in March — will narrow test score gaps for girls, students of color and youth with disabilities. Earth Day Clean Up by B.I.G (Brackenridge Improvement Group ) Calling all young (and old) eco-warriors! Get ready to roll up your sleeves and make a big difference for our planet at the Earth Day Clean Up on Sunday, April 28. Starting at 9:45 a.m. at three locations — Brackenridge Memorial Park Pavillion, Tarentum Riverview Park Pavillion, and Harrison Township Municipal Building — volunteers will work together to pick up litter and beautify our local parks. Afterward, gather at the Tarentum Snack Shack for a Volunteer Appreciation Lunch to celebrate your hard work. It’s a chance to make a positive impact on the environment and connect with like-minded individuals in the community. Aakanksha Agarwal is a wine, travel, and lifestyle writer from India. She now resides in the US. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: earth day , education , environment , families , kids , learning , Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh Zoo , science