Posted in Daily report , posts August 11, 2015 by PublicSource contributor August 11, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: U.S. attorney general visits Pittsburgh U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch visited the city on Monday. She spoke about policing policies and addressed the recent shooting in Ferguson, Mo. Pittsburgh: Protests at National FOP Convention Demonstrators protested at the National Fraternal Order of Police convention on Sunday. They took issue with the event beginning on the anniversary of Michael Brown’s death at the hands of a police officer in Ferguson. Pittsburgh: Local shooting leads to manhunt After Robert Amend allegedly shot his wife on Saturday morning, witnesses reported they later spotted him in Butler County, where local SWAT and state police set up a perimeter and searched for the suspect. As of Monday afternoon, Amend is still at large . Harrisburg: State attorney general isn’t intending to resign A spokesman for AG Kathleen Kane, who was charged with leaking information and lying under oath, says she’s not planning to resign . She plans to hold a news conference on Wednesday. Statewide: U.S. senator introduces anti-trash bill Sen. Bob Casey, D-Pa., called Pennsylvania a “ dumping ground ” for trash from around the country. His proposed TRASH Act would restrict trash from flowing into Pennsylvania from other states. Lancaster: Police look for couple suspected in McDonald’s shooting Authorities are searching for a man and a woman who were captured on the restaurant’s surveillance tape during a shooting on Friday. Police say the man fired shots after a skirmish with two other men. State College: From robbing a bank to a drug store? Cecil Barnhart, of Connellsville, is in jail on charges he robbed a bank in Patton Township on Wednesday. A clerk in Cambria County also identified him as the person who robbed the community’s Rite Aid pharmacy on Friday. NATIONAL Civil disobedience surrounds anniversary of Michael Brown’s death After a man was shot on Sunday , residents in Ferguson, Mo., called Monday a day of civil disobedience . They organized rallies to highlight police brutality against racial minorities. The area government has declared a state of emergency. Clinton pitches plan on paying college tuition without loans Presidential candidate Hillary Clinton proposed a solution to help undergraduates at public colleges pay tuition without taking out loans. The plan would not eliminate tuition debt, as families would still be expected to pay a certain amount. To pay for the plan, Clinton would change how wealthy families file their taxes. State of emergency declared in Colorado After a federal cleanup crew leaked waste from an abandoned mine into the water, the EPA declared a state of emergency. The waste continues to flow. New Jersey man charged in possible ISIS plot Nader Saadeh was arrested on Monday morning and charged with attempting to provide ‘material support’ to the terror group. Saadeh’s brother, Alaa Saadeh, was arrested and charged with conspiracy on June 29. Yellowstone rangers catch bear suspected of killing hiker Officials have captured a female grizzly bear they believe to have killed a Montana man on Friday. Park officials will conduct tests to determine if this bear was actually involved in the killing. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor IN OTHER NEWS Target nixes gendered signage The retail chain said on Friday that it would remove gendered labeling from the aisles. This follows a backlash on social media where a woman tweeted a photo of two Target signs: one for “Building Sets” and another for “Girls’ Building Sets.” The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.