Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 21, 2015 by Eric Holmberg September 21, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Erie: Schools may close due to budget impasse The superintendent of the Erie school system is considering closing schools because the district will be out of money at the end of the month due to the state budget deadlock. Statewide: Kane could lose law license The Pennsylvania Supreme Court could suspend Attorney General Kathleen Kane’s license to practice law as early as Monday. Pittsburgh: One year in, police chief deals with increasing gun violence Attempting to turn around a struggling department, Pittsburgh police chief Cameron McLay has improved department morale , but faces a recent spike in gun violence. Pittsburgh: Elsie Hillman remembered A public memorial for Elsie Hillman, who died in August at the age of 89, highlighted her philanthropic and political work. NATIONAL U.S. to take in more refugees The U.S. will admit 100,000 worldwide refugees by 2017, up from 70,000, Secretary of State John Kerry announced on Sunday . Bergdahl hearing sheds more light on desertion A preliminary hearing gives more details into the desertion of Bowe Bergdahl, the Army soldier who was captured by the Taliban in Afghanistan and returned to the U.S. in exchange for five Taliban prisoners. WORLD In Cuba, Pope Francis draws crowd of thousands Pope Francis met with Fidel and Raul Castro and gave a Sunday outdoor Mass while carefully navigating Cuban politics . IN OTHER NEWS Biggest winners and losers at the Emmy Awards Game of Thrones won best drama and took home 12 Emmys Sunday night while Amy Poehler was among the biggest snubs . Steelers win, Eagles lose On Sunday, the Pittsburgh Steelers cruised to a 43-18 victory over the San Francisco 49ers while the Philadelphia Eagles fell to 0-2 with a 20-10 loss to the Dallas Cowboys. The daily report was compiled by Eric Holmberg, a PublicSource reporter. Reach him with questions or suggestions at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI