Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts An explosion, earthquakes, more air monitoring … what didn’t happen last week in shale gas news? by PublicSource contributor April 29, 2016 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The natural gas industry in Pennsylvania this week experienced an explosion, a possible link to two earthquakes and a $12 million boost from the state. Here’s what you need to know: Pipeline Explosion A natural gas well explosion in Westmoreland County injured one person Friday morning. A man whose home caught fire after the explosion at a nearby Texas Eastern pipeline complex was taken to UPMC Mercy Hospital. Residents said the blast sounded like a “jet plane,” and houses within a quarter-mile radius were evacuated while the residual gas burned off, according to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection [DEP]. The cause of the explosion is unknown. Earthquakes under investigation The DEP is investigating two earthquakes earlier this week near a gas pad in Mahoning Township, Lawrence County. Twelve hours after a magnitude 1.9 earthquake occurred, the Associated Press reported that Hilcorp Energy Co. stopped fracking on two wells at a four-well pad. Another quake of the same magnitude was recorded ten hours after the fracking had stopped. DEP crackdown on air pollutants Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting In response to residents’ concerns about the pollutants released during drilling, the DEP announced Wednesday that it will add air monitor near more shale gas sites in rural Pennsylvania. See PublicSource’s full report here. Fiscal code gives money for natural gas use To close out Pennsylvania’s long-running 2015-2016 budget woes, Gov. Tom Wolf let a bill pass that will send $12 million to projects regarding natural gas infrastructure . The bill — part of the fiscal code, which does not require Wolf’s signature — allots $12 million to the “Natural Gas Infrastructure Fund,” providing grants that will allow hospitals, schools, businesses and local governments to use natural gas. Reach PublicSource intern Elizabeth Lepro at elepro@publicsource.org and follow her on Twitter @LeproLiz. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy , Infrastructure , Marcellus Shale