Posted in Heroin: Riding the Rush , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY ‘Unprecedented’ overdose spikes show value of opioid antidote by Jeffrey Benzing August 30, 2016 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Staggering overdose spikes in Ohio, West Virginia and elsewhere show how authorities remain daunted several years into an opioid crisis that kills thousands of drug users every year. Last week, officials in Cincinnati reported at least 174 overdoses . Normally, the city gets four overdose calls a day, according to officials. The West Virginia city of Huntington recently reported 27 overdoses in just five hours. Some victims seemed dead. One story describes a police officer pushing his knuckle into the sternum of a man who had turned blue on the dining room floor of a house with several overdoses. He miraculously sat up, then seemed to pass out and was revived by the overdose antidote naloxone. Other victims were found in the neighboring yards and at a nearby housing complex. Twenty-six victims survived in Huntington. But that’s just one isolated period, and, over time, many others have died. In Cincinnati, the death toll also remained low, even as the region’s top public health official described the spike as ‘unprecedented.’ Again, naloxone is credited. The antidote can be injected or sprayed in a drug user’s nostril. If applied in time, a drug user will live. That means they’ll have a chance to get treatment, or else survive to use another day. Naloxone, however, won’t work if first responders aren’t carrying it . It can also take several doses. In Pennsylvania, the antidote is available from a pharmacy to anyone who wants it, including drug users. If heroin is used socially, an overdose can be stopped before police or paramedics arrive. Beyond heroin, drug users are being killed by the painkiller fentanyl, as well as by carfentanil, a painkiller used in elephants. More traditional painkillers like OxyContin are also commonly linked to overdoses. Through July, 148 people have died from drug overdoses this year in Allegheny County. That statistic only includes closed cases, however, and could continue to climb. Heroin and fentanyl are the most commonly found drugs. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting In 2015, overdoses spiked to an all-time high of 424 deaths in the county. That’s up nearly 40 percent from the previous year. Since 2008, 2,212 people have died from overdose locally. However, those statistics remain incomplete. Police in many areas, including Pittsburgh, have only recently started carrying naloxone. Until final overdose stats are available, it’s difficult to tell how much that effort can keep overdoses from increasing. It’s clear, however, that lives have been saved. Local paramedics used naloxone at least 1,466 times from the beginning of 2014 through mid-September last year, according to a recent report from Allegheny County. While officials are realizing the importance of stopping overdoses, treatment experts still say they struggle for funding and support for interventions that can keep users alive. Last year, for instance, the state awarded $2.5 million in grants to fight the opioid crisis. Then that money was lopped from the budget , and many of the bills were left unpaid. The current state budget, however, did include $15 million for specialized centers to treat opioid addiction. Additional centers are being paid for by Medicaid savings and federal funds . In 2015, Pennsylvania overdoses spiked nearly 25 percent to 3,383 deaths, according to the Drug Enforcement Administration. Officials fear those numbers will worsen. Reach Jeffrey Benzing at jbenzing@publicsource.org Follow him on Twitter @jabenzing . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice