Posted in Education , Equity , HEALTH , Inside our Newsroom , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Talking about heroin by swalsh March 31, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X It’s not an easy subject. Heroin. But it’s important to talk about it. We were honored last week to have as guests for a PublicSource event people in recovery who are now giving back to the community, and parents who’ve lost children to drug addiction and are reaching out to other parents. They need to talk about addiction so that we can see that they’re people just like us who had a disease. The parents need to share their stories to help relieve their own grief and reach out to help other parents. And they need us to engage in the conversation to help remove the stigma of drug addiction — the shame that so many bear because others think addiction is about weakness or bad parenting or poverty. You can see the video of the panel and the conversation with people in the audience here. You can see the tweets about the evening and a story about the panel here. Thanks to all those who participated. We have a long way to go with this problem. PublicSource will continue to cover it. Heroin: A Deadly Crisis PublicSource criminal justice reporter Jeffrey Benzing, who has been reporting on the heroin epidemic, has received a 2015 McCormick Specialized Reporting fellowship supported by the Poynter Institute. He’ll go to Chicago for specialized police-community relations training at the Community Media Workshop on the Columbia College Chicago campus. The Workshop’s program is funded by the Robert R. McCormick Foundation. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Criminal Justice , Drug abuse and rehabilitation , Overlooked communities , State oversight of health and welfare systems , Vulnerable populations