Posted in Daily report , posts July 18, 2015 by Eric Holmberg July 18, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: City reaches energy agreement with U.S. Department of Energy The city will partner with the National Energy Technology Laboratory to help modernize the city’s energy infrastructure. Pittsburgh: Tuition at Pitt is going up again There will be a 2.5 percent tuition increase at the University of Pittsburgh’s main campus, but tuition won’t increase at the satellite campuses. Statewide: Pennsylvania’s unemployment rate stays at 5.4 percent Pennsylvania’s unemployment rate remained static from May to June. The state rate is slightly more than the national average of 5.3 percent, according to the Pennsylvania Department of Labor & Industry . NATIONAL Investigators begin delving into Chattanooga shooter’s past Mohammad Youssef Abdulazeez was searching for meaning in his life before he shot and killed four Marines in Chattanooga on Thursday. James Holmes trial moves to the penalty phase After Thursday’s guilty verdict, survivors of the Aurora, Colo., movie theater shooting want James Holmes to be sentenced to death . Montana oil train spilled 35,000 gallons A train from North Dakota carrying Bakken crude oil derailed in Montana on Thursday spilling 35,000 gallons of oil, but the incident didn’t result in any injuries. For other derailment news, see our weekly roundup here . IN OTHER NEWS Donald Trump’s candidacy now filed under entertainment? Despite being at or near the top of several nationwide polls, The Huffington Post announced their coverage of Donald Trump’s presidential campaign will be moved from the political section of their website to the entertainment section. More Pluto photos from New Horizons probe The New Horizons probe continues to send back images of Pluto’s icy plains . The daily report was compiled by Eric Holmberg, a PublicSource reporter. Reach him with questions or suggestions at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.