Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts Antipsychotic use at five-star nursing homes by PublicSource contributor October 6, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Antipsychotic use at five-star nursing homes The Food and Drug Administration approved antipsychotics for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorders, but nursing homes nationwide are using them off label despite a warning that the drug can cause death in patients with dementia. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is taking action. It began considering the use of antipsychotics for its Nursing Home Compare five-star ratings in February in an effort to limit the use of the powerful drugs by nursing homes, according to an Al Jazeera America report. More than 40 nursing homes with current five-star ratings — including the South Mountain Restoration Center in Pennsylvania — continue to use antipsychotics at almost twice the national average. A Government Accountability Office report this year found one-third of nursing home residents with dementia receive antipsychotics. The national average for all nursing home residents is 18 percent. The South Mountain Restoration Center, the 159-bed long-term care facility in Franklin County, recorded that nearly 53 percent of its residents received an antipsychotic medication, according to CMS. Tony Chicotel, a staff attorney for California Advocates for Nursing Home Reform, told Al Jazeera that nursing homes see antipsychotics as a quick solution to calm down residents without considering the risk. The story features Maria Guerrero’s mother who resides in Idle Acre Convalescent nursing home, which specializes in dementia care, outside of Los Angeles. Guerrero was unaware of the use of antipsychotics, and when she asked why her mother was tired and falling asleep during visits, nurses said that she was up late. About 52 percent of Idle Care’s patients received antipsychotics from July 2014 through March 2015, according to Al Jazeera . According to the report, Dr. Helen Kales, director of the University of Michigan’s Program for Positive Aging, examined nearly 100,000 patients from Veteran Affairs hospitals. According to Dr. Kales data: Looking at the effect over a six-month period, she found the antipsychotic Haldol caused an additional death for every 26 patients with dementia receiving the drug. For Risperdal, the rate was one additional death for every 27 patients; Zyprexa, one additional death per 40 patients; and Seroquel, one per 50. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Kales and colleagues are working to find alternatives for caregivers who deal with behaviors associated with dementia. Christine Manganas can be reached at cmanganas@publicsource.org Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Aging , Care of children and elderly , Disabilities , Nursing homes