Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Cities nationwide increase security after Paris attacks by PublicSource contributor November 17, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pittsburgh Police Pittsburgh and several other cities have been increasing security measures following the terror attacks in Paris on Friday, but there are no known specific terror threats against the United States. On Sunday at Heinz Field, football fans saw an increased number of law enforcement officers patrolling their tailgates and security was beefed up in the stadium for the Steelers game against the Cleveland Browns. Jimmy Sacco, director of Heinz Field Stadium Management, released a statement Saturday regarding the increased security. Following the events in Paris on Friday, we are closely monitoring events and have been in communication with the Department of Homeland Security and the FBI, which have informed us that there are no known threats against NFL stadiums. Sonya Toler, spokeswoman for the Pittsburgh Department of Public Safety, told PublicSource in a statement that “public safety personnel are actively working with intelligence authorities to identify any indications of local threats and will respond accordingly if any threats are identified.” Multiple other cities are increasing security in the wake of the attacks, according to an NBC News report. Cincinnati assigned bomb sniffing dogs to Paul Brown Stadium Monday night as well as extra officers. New York deployed a task force of 500 that is dedicated to responding only to terror attacks. The New York Police Department was planning this strike force for months, but in the wake of the attacks in Paris, Monday was the first day they were on the streets. Miami police jumped to social media shortly following the attacks, warning residents and tourists to take caution when enjoying the city’s nightlife. According to NBC : “Having officers there in plain sight, visible with long weapons … can be a visual deterrent to somebody that might be looking to launch an attack,” said Don Borelli, a former FBI assistant special agent in charge who is now a senior vice president with the Soufan Group, a security firm. Intern Christine Manganas can be reached at cmanganas@publicsource.org Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI