Posted in Education , On the beat , posts Report: PA charter schools defrauded $30 million from taxpayers by Natasha Khan October 1, 2014 June 12, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Three activist groups say Pennsylvania charter schools have defrauded at least $30 million intended for school children in the state since 1997, because of flaws in oversight from state agencies. The Center for Popular Democracy, Action United of Philadelphia and Pittsburgh and Integrity in Education released the report Wednesday. All three are nonprofits that advocate for education. The groups call on the state Attorney General’s Office to look for fraud in all Pennsylvania charter schools. They also want a temporary moratorium on new charter schools, saying oversight agencies are failing to monitor the 186 charter schools in the state. From The Philadelphia Inquirer: “[The report] asks the legislature to require charters to undergo regular fraud-risk assessments and fraud audits. And it suggests that until the law is changed to require such actions, charters should voluntarily undergo them and make the findings public. Researchers said most of the $30 million in fraud that has been detected since the state’s charter law was passed in 1997 was not uncovered by charter-oversight offices but by whistleblowers and the media, including The Inquirer. They said the total amount of misspent funds was likely far larger.” School districts in Pennsylvania paid $1.5 billion to charter schools that enrolled 128,712 students in 2012-13, according to the Philadelphia Inquirer . According to the report, charter school enrollment in the state has doubled three times since 2000. The report laid out instances of fraud where charter school owners used school funds for home improvements, to buy airplanes and to support a restaurant. Instances included cases where charter school officials were indicted or pleaded guilty to fraud charges. From the Inquirer: Examples include Nicholas Trombetta, founder and former CEO of the Pennsylvania Cyber Charter School in Midland, who is awaiting federal trial in Pittsburgh on charges that he diverted $8 million in school funds for personal use. The tally also includes $6.3 million that federal prosecutors allege Dorothy June Brown defrauded from the four Philadelphia-area charters she founded. The report said Pennsylvania charter schools are exposed to fraud because school districts and state agencies that are supposed to provide oversight are understaffed and staff members lack training. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsoure.org . Follow her on twitter @khantasha. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan