Posted in Daily report , posts June 23, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 23, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Westmoreland County: High school attack hearing Alex Hribal , the teen charged with 21 counts of attempted homicide at Franklin Regional High School, appeared in court yesterday asking to be tried as a juvenile. He’s currently charged as an adult. If the transfer is made, a guilty conviction would imprison Hribal until age 21. As of Monday evening, the judge had not made a decision. Pittsburgh: August Wilson Center The center for African-American culture reopened bookings on June 1 for the first time after its sale last November. The center still hasn’t established a permanent board or self-generated programming, but aims to rebuild itself in the coming months. Beaver County: Shell obtains air and water permits On Monday, the Department of Environmental Protection [DEP] granted Royal Dutch Shell the air and water permits they needed to develop an ethane cracker site in beaver County, but it’s not yet known if they’ll go through with the proposal. Harrisburg: The governor’s pipeline task force The Wolf administration has set up the Pipeline Infrastructure Task Force to oversee the connection of disparate wells to pipelines with the help of the DEP. The DEP expects to create up to 25,000 miles of new pipe to connect the wells to major lines. Statewide: E. coli concerns Niagara Bottling issued a voluntary recall of water produced at two of their Pennsylvania manufacturing plants because of a contaminated spring source. Although the bacteria hasn’t caused any illnesses yet, recall guidelines can be found here . NATIONAL President Obama on racism’s long shadow Obama said racism isn’t cured , and it’s up to the American public to acknowledge the urgency and make the necessary changes. Returned campaign funds Several politicians and candidates are returning campaign donations made by Earl Holt, the alleged white supremacist leader of the Council of Conservative Citizens, the hate group believed to have inspired Dylann Roof in the Charleston, S.C., shootings. Holt donated to several prominent GOP candidates, including Rand Paul, Rick Santorum and Mitt Romney. Developments in the convict manhunt A lead appeared on Monday when investigators discovered the escaped convicts’ DNA on food at a camp 20 miles west of Clinton Correctional Facility. Jordan Spieth wins U.S. Open At 21, Spieth is the youngest golfer to win the tournament since 1922. His win on Sunday also made him only the sixth person to take the Masters and U.S. Open in the same year. IN OTHER NEWS Neanderthal crossbreeds A study published Monday in the journal Nature reveals new evidence of Neanderthal and early Homo sapiens interbreeding. A 37,000-year-old jawbone from Romania has between 6 and 9 percent Neanderthal DNA, which is the highest ever recorded. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.