Posted in Election 2020 Episode 1, Season 2: Why vote? We spoke to local residents on why they’re at peace sitting it out. by Andy Kubis and Jourdan Hicks October 30, 2020 February 25, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photo via iStock) Two words can be used to explain the predictions for the looming presidential election of 2020. Record. Breaking. It’s being predicted that in this election, 17 million more Americans than in 2016 will show up next week to cast their ballots in Biden v. Trump. If you’ve noticed, in our media, on TV, radio, social media there are targeted efforts to make sure that all eligible voters turn up and turn out on Election Day. Have you ever wondered what it’s like to sit through a season of campaign ads and unsolicited text messages, knowing you’re not going to vote? A lot of people know it. In fact, according to The New York Times, “More than 3.5 million eligible voters in the state did not cast ballots for president in the 2016 election.” In our inaugural episode of Season 2, we listen to the reasons why people are going to sit out this election, why they disengage from voting and their choice to not seize this political moment. Welcome back to the PublicSource podcast “From the Source.” Listen to the first episode of From the Source Season 2 . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram Jourdan Hicks jourdan@publicsource.org instagram Jourdan is a senior community correspondent at PublicSource. Previously, Jourdan was engaged as a community-based educator in the Hazelwood section of the city. A lifelong Pittsburgh resident, she’s... More by Jourdan Hicks