Posted in Economy & Housing URA weighs joining Housing Authority to aid new homeowners In OwnPGH, homebuyers below certain income thresholds could get as much as $90,000 in assistance. by Eric Jankiewicz September 8, 2022 September 8, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Butler Street in Lawrenceville. (Photo via Adobe Stock) In an effort to help first time homebuyers contend with rising real estate costs, the City of Pittsburgh set aside $15 million from federal American Rescue Plan aid for grants and deferred mortgages. The Urban Redevelopment Authority [URA], the city’s economic development agency, discussed the emerging OwnPGH program on Thursday during its board meeting as a step toward finalizing the effort. The URA and the Housing Authority of the City of Pittsburgh [HACP] would run OwnPGH to help first time homebuyers who make 80% or less of the area median income [AMI]. If approved, OwnPGH would provide grants of up to $50,000 and HACP would add an additional $40,000 in deferred mortgages. “We’re beginning this conversation and getting the program off the ground,” said Derek Kendall-Morris, URA’s manager of consumer lending. “The overall goal is to increase access to homeownership across the city to potential homebuyers at or below 80% AMI.” The URA currently can only provide deferred financing to people who are buying houses that are being constructed or rehabilitated through the agency’s housing development programs, according to the URA staff’s report to the board. If approved, the program would allow the URA to give up to $50,000 to first time homebuyers who make 80% or below the AMI. In the Pittsburgh area, 80% of the AMI for a household of one is $53,100, and for a household of four it’s $75,850. Under the new program, homeowners who purchase a place through OwnPGH will be required, for 30 years, to only sell to other buyers who make 80% of AMI or less. Additionally, the housing authority’s deferred mortgage of up to $40,000 would require no regular payment and would have a 0% interest rate, according to the URA. If the house isn’t sold within 10 years, the deferred mortgage would be fully forgiven. Kendall-Morris told the URA board that the agency has begun to increase their staffing to accommodate the expected increase in work from the new program. “We believe we’re prepared to launch the program,” he said. “We’ve begun to staff up in preparation for launch. So we’re pretty much ready to go.” Because funding for the program would come through the American Rescue Plan [ARP], it would have to be used by 2027. The URA will accept feedback and continue to finalize the plan, and the board may vote on final approval in October. After that, a funding agreement will have to be finalized by the city in order for the ARP funds to be accessible. Eric Jankiewicz is PublicSource’s economic development reporter, and can be reached at ericj@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ericjankiewicz . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow Eric Jankiewicz ericj@publicsource.org Eric Jankiewicz is a reporter focused on housing and economic development for PublicSource. A native New Yorker, Eric moved to Pittsburgh in 2017 and has since fallen in love with his adopted city, even... More by Eric Jankiewicz