Posted in Inside our Newsroom Emerging talents: Meet four journalists covering Pittsburgh this summer PublicSource’s 2022 summer intern class brings a variety of backgrounds, perspectives and interests to Pittsburgh’s news environment. by Rich Lord June 24, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Interns at PublicSource produce their own stories and visuals, even as they collaborate with each other and with established journalists on one-time stories and involved projects. This summer, Terryaun Bell is focused on PublicSource’s intensive fact-checking and verification process. A senior at Robert Morris University studying communications with a journalism concentration and a minor in sociology, he is preparing to serve as the news editor in RMU’s student newsroom. A Hopewell resident, he also serves as the class of 2023’s president, hosts his own podcast called Philosophize and enjoys cooking. Contact: terryaun@publicsource.org Ashanti McLaurin is a senior at the University of Pittsburgh, studying English nonfiction writing with minors in creative writing, Africana studies and Chinese. She is a Pitt cheerleader and opinions columnist at The Pitt News. Originally from New York but residing in North Carolina, she enjoys watching tv shows, reading, and fishing. She is starting her summer at PublicSource reporting on both the pandemic and government accountability. Contact: ashanti@publicsource.org Emily Sauchelli is a graduate student at the Craig Newmark Graduate School of Journalism in New York City, where she is studying health and science and visual journalism. The New York native is excited to delve into the very different educational world of Allegheny County. In her spare time, she enjoys the outdoors and loves photographing animals. Contact: emilys@publicsource.org Clare Sheedy is a Chicago native who moved to Pittsburgh in 2021. She is now a senior at Pitt studying English literature and digital media, and a staff member at The Pitt News. A former teacher’s aide who is passionate about community storytelling, her focus this summer is visual journalism. Contact: clare@publicsource.org PublicSource is a nonpartisan, nonprofit, digital-first media organization dedicated to serving Pittsburgh and the region. PublicSource inspires critical thinking and bold ideas through journalism rooted in facts, diverse voices and pursuit of transparency. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord