Posted in Daily report , posts May 14, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 14, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Good morning. Here’s the news you need to know. PENNSYLVANIA Philadelphia: Amtrak crash, at least 7 dead and more than 200 wounded An Amtrak train from Washington, D.C., to New York derailed and most of its cars rolled. The train was traveling at more than 100 mph when it crashed, twice the speed limit, and its black box is currently being analyzed. Pittsburgh: Lawrenceville foundry causes concern McConway & Torley , a 19th century steel foundry, is the subject of an emissions investigation by the Allegheny County Health Department. The agency wants to significantly limit the foundry’s production. Harrisburg: Pension reform bill passes Senate The Republican-sponsored bill aims to cut state employees’ benefits and require them to contribute more. The bill now heads to the House for approval. Harrisburg: Hersheypark bans selfie-sticks Out of concern for general safety, the theme park has deemed the use of selfie-sticks on all of its attractions to be grounds for removal from the premises. NATIONAL University of Virginia associate dean sues Rolling Stone Rolling Stone’s exposé, “A Rape on Campus,” was retracted after it was found to contain serious flaws. Now, Nicole Eramo, one of its subjects and the University of Virginia’s associate dean of students, is suing the magazine for defamation. Boston Marathon bomber to be sentenced The jury in Dzhokhar Tsarnaev’s trial met Wednesday afternoon to deliberate his sentence. Tsarnaev faces 30 charges, 17 of which call for the death penalty. Democrats oppose Obama’s trade bill On Tuesday, Senate Democrats voted to block the president’s 12-nation Trans-Pacific Partnership bill , believing that the bill poses harm to American jobs and the environment. IN OTHER NEWS Picasso sets world auction record It’s not surprising that Pablo Picasso’s “Women of Algiers” sold for $179 million, well over its estimated $140 million value. This marks his third painting sold for more than $100 million. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI