Posted in Daily report , posts September 10, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 10, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Homicides are down but gun violence is up There were 16 firearm-related deaths this summer compared with 21 last year, according to a report by Pittsburgh City Paper . However, there were 83 non-fatal shootings in the city this summer, up from 60 last year. Pittsburgh: City launches “inclusive innovation” roadmap Pittsburgh will start opening city data, among other initiatives, in its Roadmap for Inclusive Innovation. It will help citizens get access to “technology, city resources and information.” Mount Lebanon: Deer debate continues Commissioners approved of an archery hunt in response to the community’s deer population. They’re also planning to supplement the hunt with sharpshooters and a deer sterilization experiment. New Castle: Fire ravages three homes An empty house caught fire Wednesday morning and the blaze quickly spread to two other residences. Two people were in one of the houses at the time, but escaped unharmed. As of Wednesday afternoon, the cause of the fire was under investigation. State College: Student killed by vehicle A Penn State grad student was hit and killed near the university Monday night. He was a resident of Wexford and a graduate from North Allegheny High School. The man who was driving the vehicle that hit him stopped and had not been charged with a crime as of Wednesday afternoon. NATIONAL First hearing for Planned Parenthood Representatives of the family planning center were not invited to attend the first judicial hearing in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday. An anti-abortion group, reproductive justice expert and two “abortion survivors” testified at the hearing, which is in response to controversial videos about Planned Parenthood’s fetal tissue donation program. Airline chief steps down The chairman and chief executive of United Airlines resigned alongside two other officials during a federal investigation of corruption. The probe questioned the carrier’s role in establishing an unprofitable flight for the convenience of a former Port Authority chairman that factored into the tense relationship between United Airlines and Newark Liberty International Airport. Fire in Vegas An engine failure caused a British Airways plane to catch fire during takeoff from Las Vegas to London. Twenty of the 172 people onboard were injured. IN OTHER NEWS Long live the queen Queen Elizabeth II surpassed her great-great grandmother Queen Victoria as the longest ruling monarch of Britain on Wednesday. Queen Elizabeth, 89, has ruled for 63 years, seven months and two days, for a total of 23,226 days. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.