Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 17, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 17, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Auditor general to audit ICA Pennsylvania Auditor General Eugene DePasquale announced an audit of the city’s Intergovernmental Cooperation Authority Tuesday. Sen. Wayne Fontana (D-Brookline) also plans to introduce legislation that would abolish the authority. Joseph Scarnati, R-Jefferson County, said that money shouldn’t flow to Pittsburgh if the city isn’t doing what the ICA wants. Pittsburgh: Postmaster charged with intimidation Daniel Davis is charged with intimidating coworkers so they wouldn’t report whether they saw him opening packages containing illegal drugs. Davis allegedly opened the packages to “clean up the streets” and threatened to kill witnesses. His employment status is unknown. Pittsburgh: Youth care worker suspended Derrick Dawkins faces criminal charges for allegedly asking one of his charges at Shuman Detention Center, a 16-year-old girl, for sex via a handwritten note. Dawkins is on unpaid suspension and faces multiple charges. Philadelphia: Senator opposes Iran deal Sen. Pat Toomey criticized President Obama’s Iran nuclear deal, which passed last week, as unlawful because the President did not hand Congress all of the appropriate documents before the vote. Toomey said that Republicans will continue to fight the accord. Harrisburg: Agencies sue Department of Human Services More than 100 nonprofits and private agencies are suing Gov. Tom Wolf and the Department of Human Services for failing to pass a budget on funding school spending. The prosecutors say they depend on federal tax money but are not getting it because of the impasse. Washington: Investigation prompted by fight at football game Isaiah Faulk, runningback for the Westminster College Titans, and Zak Dickey, Washington and Jefferson defensive back, are under scrutiny for getting into a fight mid-game on Saturday. KDKA released a video showing Faulk punching Dickey in the face. NATIONAL Number of people uninsured drops According to new Census figures, 33 million Americans don’t have health insurance , which is nearly 9 million fewer than last year. The decrease is likely tied to the impact of the Affordable Care Act. However the rate of people in poverty stayed constant at 46.7 million Americans. GOP Debate, Round II CNN hosted the second presidential debate for Republican candidates Wednesday night. The 6 p.m. debate was to feature the four lowest polling candidates, Rick Santorum, Bobby Jindal, George Pataki and Lindsey Graham. The primetime debate was scheduled to pit Donald Trump against Jeb Bush, Ben Carson and newcomer Carly Fiorina. Oklahoma inmate granted temporary reprieve Richard Glossip , who was convicted of killing his boss in 1997, was granted a two-week stay of execution hours before his scheduled lethal injection on Wednesday. On Tuesday, his attorneys claimed to have uncovered evidence that suggests Glossip was framed. Freshman ‘hoax bomber’ Ahmed Mohamed, 14, took a homemade clock to MacArthur High School in Texas on Monday to show his teacher. Another teacher believed the clock was the makings of a bomb and confiscated it. Mohamed was arrested, taken to a juvenile detention center and suspended for three days. The incident propelled Mohamed to Internet stardom. He even got invited to the White House . IN OTHER NEWS When it’s time to take a break Researchers at Baylor University propose that around 10 to 11 a.m. is the best time of day to take a break — people are freshly caffeinated, caught up on email and have read the Daily Report by that time. Participants in the study reported feeling much more energized with mid-morning breaks than mid-afternoon ones. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos and Stephanie Roman, PublicSource interns. You can reach them with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org and sroman@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.