Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts Trump leads Republican presidential field in Pennsylvania by Eric Holmberg August 20, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The usually unmasked President Donald Trump should not bring a campaign event to Allegheny County so soon after his COVID-19 diagnosis, according to County Executive Rich Fitzgerald. (File photo) Donald Trump has won yet another presidential poll with the support of 24 percent of registered Republicans in Pennsylvania. Trump beat Ben Carson (13 percent) and Sen. Marco Rubio (10 percent) in a Quinnipiac University poll released Thursday. Among the other candidates, former Hewlett-Packard executive Carly Fiorina had 7 percent, former Gov. Jeb Bush took 6 percent and Sen. Ted Cruz and Gov. Scott Walker each had 5 percent. In the poll of three key swing states — Florida, Ohio, and Pennsylvania — Trump won Pennsylvania and Florida while Ohio Gov. John Kasich won his home state. But, Trump’s lead in Pennsylvania may not be long lasting. According to the Quinnipiac press release: “Donald Trump may have the raw horserace numbers, but below the surface there is a looming problem: Pennsylvania voters give him stunningly bad numbers on trust, honesty and favorability,” said Tim Malloy, assistant director of the Quinnipiac University Poll. For the Democrats in Pennsylvania, former Sen. Hillary Clinton led with 45 percent, followed by Sen. Bernie Sanders with 19 percent and Vice President Joe Biden with 17 percent. Also from Malloy: And although she is the Democratic frontrunner, Hillary Clinton’s overall numbers are not much better than Trump’s. Among registered Pennsylvania voters in the poll, the same percentage — 55 percent — had an unfavorable view of both Clinton and Trump. That was more than any other candidate. Who gets the love? The one guy who hasn’t declared. Vice President Joseph Biden, a Scranton boy made good, is perhaps becoming a more important player in the 2016 presidential race, with a solid grip on the ‘from the gut’ support of Pennsylvanians. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The greatest proportion of Pennsylvania’s registered voters — 46 percent — had a favorable view of Biden and Rubio. The pollsters called land lines and cell phones and had a margin of error of 4.7 percentage points. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @holmberges . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.