Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan March 4, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Report: The feds are going easy on railroad companies Federal railroad regulators aren’t criminally prosecuting railroad companies that have had serious safety violations on trains hauling hazardous materials and are not pursuing civil fines when necessary, according to a new report released by the U.S. Department of Transportation inspector general. After looking at a small sample of safety violations over a five-year period, the inspector general’s office found 17 cases that should have been referred for criminal investigation. Maine reverses course and will now release crude oil transport data After consulting the Maine Attorney General’s office, state environmental regulators will begin releasing information on crude oil shipments. This comes after the passage of a controversial law in October that prevented state or local officials from releasing any information on crude-by-rail shipments in the state. NTSB: Lynchburg crude oil derailment could have been prevented The accident where 17 rail tank cars hauling crude oil derailed on a CSX train in Lynchburg, Va., two years ago wouldn’t have happened if the railroad had time to implement the recommendations it had accepted from a rail failure working group two weeks before the accident, a report from the National Transportation Safety Board concluded . New York and federal safety officials fix defects on crude oil routes After examining 215 oil tank cars and about 190 miles of track, the safety officials found and fixed four critical defects and 16 non-critical defects. Critical defects are problems that need to be fixed immediately. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan