Posted in 2025 Pittsburgh Mayoral Race Tell us your questions for Pittsburgh mayoral candidates Mayor Ed Gainey and three challengers will take the stage April 29, and PublicSource is seeking questions to pose to the candidates for Pittsburgh mayor. by Public Source April 10, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X What would you like to ask the people running for Pittsburgh mayor? Fill out the form below with your questions All four candidates in the primary election will be at a public forum hosted by the Voting is Power Pittsburgh Regional Coalition, PUMP and PublicSource on April 29, and we want to know what topics and questions interest you. The candidates are competing in May 20 Democratic and Republican primary elections, the winners of which will face each other in the Nov. 5 general election. The next mayor will take office in January. The candidates attending the forum are: Incumbent Mayor Ed Gainey , a Democrat seeking a second term in office County Controller Corey O’Connor , challenging Gainey in the Democratic primary Former police detective Tony Moreno , a Republican who held the GOP nomination in 2021 Clothing store owner Thomas West , a Republican new to the political stage. Who’s running for Pittsburgh mayor? Get to know the candidates, issues. Moderators Chandi Chapman of WTAE and Josiah Gilliam of PUMP will pose questions contributed by community members as well as PublicSource journalists. The event at the Pittsburgh Playhouse at Point Park University is open to the public and doors open at 5:15 p.m. on April 29. Topics that have come up during the campaign so far include: Public safety and the management of the Pittsburgh Bureau of Police Policy around affordable housing, zoning and development The role of major nonprofits , like hospitals and universities, in the city’s finances The city’s overall financial health Ways in which changes brought about by the Trump administration have impacted Pittsburgh Propose a question for the mayoral candidates: Name: Neighborhood of residence: Δ Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow