Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource names newsroom leadership by Public Source May 10, 2022 May 11, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X As PublicSource celebrates its 10th anniversary, the organization announces the promotion of Halle Stockton to the role of editor-in-chief. This change comes at a pivotal moment for PublicSource, as CEO Eric D. Zack takes on responsibility for the organization’s business operations. As editor-in-chief, Stockton will consolidate responsibility for all editorial strategy and operations. PublicSource Editor-in-Chief Halle Stockton. Stockton joined PublicSource as a reporter in 2012 and was promoted to managing editor in 2015. Under Stockton’s leadership, the PublicSource newsroom has amplified the organization’s mission to inspire critical thinking and bold ideas through journalism rooted in facts, diverse voices and the pursuit of transparency. Stockton has led PublicSource to produce journalism with impact, to significantly grow its audience and to expand editorial partnerships with local and regional newsrooms. PublicSource has twice been the recipient of the Online News Association’s Online Journalism Awards for General Excellence by a micro-newsroom. PublicSource’s journalism responds to community needs and holds accountable powerful individuals and systems, Stockton said. “The principles and thoughtful public-service journalism you’ve come to expect from PublicSource will continue,” she said. “Our team will double down on providing residents of the Pittsburgh region with deeper clarity and context and new ideas that broaden understanding.” Prior to joining PublicSource, Stockton was a reporter for the Sarasota (Fla.) Herald-Tribune for four years. She has won several awards for her journalism; most notably, she was named a 2016 finalist for the prestigious Livingston Awards for Young Journalists and earned a national Sigma Delta Chi award from the Society of Professional Journalists in 2015. The Institute for Nonprofit News selected Stockton as one of 10 Emerging Leaders in U.S. nonprofit journalism in 2017. PublicSource Managing Editor Rich Lord. “Halle has a distinguished track record of success as a reporter, editor and leader,” Zack said. “We are fortunate and excited to have her continue to lead PublicSource’s award-winning team to provide Pittsburghers in-depth reporting on meaningful stories that make a difference in our region.” Stockton has named Rich Lord as managing editor. Lord, a Pittsburgh journalist for a quarter century who has helped take PublicSource reporting to new heights since early 2020, will partner with Stockton on editorial strategy and coaching all of our journalists to produce excellent journalism for the Pittsburgh region. “I’ve been privileged to be part of PublicSource during a time of intensified need for incisive local journalism, and I’m thrilled about the team we have and the way we’re growing,” said Lord. Lord reported for the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette from 2005 through early 2020, leading projects on child poverty, the opioid epidemic, communities with concentrations of people accessing mental health services, and the federal use of confidential informants. He has covered the federal court and city government beats, and was part of a team that won the Pulitzer Prize for breaking news reporting, for reporting on the Tree of Life massacre. Rich has also worked for the Pittsburgh City Paper and the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow