Posted in Aftermath: Synagogue attack , Featured , PUBLIC SAFETY I pray that the same outpouring of support for Pittsburgh’s Jewish community be replicated for all marginalized communities by Zack Block November 1, 2018 November 19, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Zack Block is the executive director of Repair the World Pittsburgh. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Editor’s Note: As journalists, we spend a lot of time talking with officials and community members and distilling it into stories that explore important issues of our time. But we realize that sometimes it is just more powerful to hear it straight from the source. This is one of those times. I am reeling from the horrifying attack on our Jewish community this past Saturday during Shabbat services at Tree of Life synagogue, home of Tree of Light, New Light and Dor Hadash congregations. I was born in Pittsburgh and chose to make Squirrel Hill my home 18 years ago when my transplant-wife said it was “Squirrel Hill or bust.” Much like the majority of Squirrelhillians, after planting our roots here, we jumped head first into our community’s unparalleled Jewish life — both personally and professionally. This community has my heart; it has loved and cared for my family and I, and we have loved it hard right back. I am heartbroken by this tragedy, this horrific act of anti-Semitic violence. I am comforted to know that together we will find ways to bring light to the darkness of these times. That is the spirit of Pittsburgh, the spirit of Squirrel Hill and the undying spirit of the Jewish people. While the wave of support toward my family, the Jewish people and my city has felt like the warmest blanket on the coldest day, I can’t help but feel that apathy persists. There are so many who are not enveloped, included and cared for. Although social justice and the pursuit of mitzvot has been ingrained in the fabric of the Jewish people since the beginning of time, there is still much work to be done. We must use our voice and our privilege as Jews to stand up with our neighbors and with marginalized communities who have not always experienced the same outpouring of national support as we have seen this week. For example, when members of the Islamic community are victims of senseless violence — as one member, Abdulganiyu Sanusi, was on Oct. 13 when he was fatally shot while working as a pizza deliveryman — we must support them as they have supported us. At Repair the World, we are dedicated to working both within and outside of our Jewish community to build meaningful partnerships across Pittsburgh through serving together and fostering meaningful relationships rooted in justice and social change. The time for our collective service has never been more important than now. I pray that the same outpouring of kindness, inclusion and hope bestowed upon the Jewish community in the last few days be replicated for all marginalized communities. To our friends in the Black, Muslim, refugee and immigrant, and LGBTQIA communities, we will stand with you as you are so steadfastly standing with us. Our opposition to hate and oppression will be stronger in solidarity. “While the wave of support toward my family, the Jewish people and my city has felt like the warmest blanket on the coldest day, I can’t help but feel that apathy persists.” Zack Block, executive director of Repair the World Pittsburgh, urges people to replicate the support they’ve shown to the Jewish community for marginalized communities. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Hatred is here. It’s been here and it continues to pervade. As our community has shown the world over the past several days, we will not let hatred stop us from pursuing our daily work for social change. We will not let fear stop us from continuing to build relationships, to listen and learn from one another and to pursue justice. We will continue to use our Jewish values, texts and traditions as guideposts as we address urgent needs in collaboration with local communities and our partner organizations. We welcome your support just as Squirrel Hill welcomed me, and this community continues to welcome incredible support from all over the world. While I am in pain, I am starting to heal by focusing on the countless acts of love and kindness in this community. You see it on every street corner, on professional sports’ jerseys, at local pizza shops. I feel our community banding together in a mission to heal not only ourselves, but also our fractured world. I hope you’ll join us. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Zack Block is executive director of Repair the World Pittsburgh, located in East Liberty. He can be reached at zack.block@weRepair.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI One reply on “I pray that the same outpouring of support for Pittsburgh’s Jewish community be replicated for all marginalized communities” Jukesgrrl says: November 4, 2018 at 4:39 pm Thank you, Zack Block, for that beautiful essay. You are so right. I am a former Pittsburgher (Hobart & Wightman!) now living 60 miles from the border with Mexico. You know, that place where we do NOT need a wall.  So I see more than one marginalized community day-to-day (including poverty-stricken white people who need decent hourly pay and healthcare). We need a lot more compassion in this country and a lot less hate. Blessings on you and yours. Comments are closed.