Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource launches ‘Know Pittsburgh. For Real.’ by Public Source November 5, 2021 November 10, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X You know that the steel industry was born here. You know that we put fries on everything. But do you know Pittsburgh, for real? Whether a newcomer to the Steel City or a longtime resident, our home is bound to make you curious. Pittsburgh is bursting with history, intricacies and quirks. Our new 12-part email course is an effort to unpack the nuances of our city and be a resident guide for those wanting to learn more. The course is a primer for all things Pittsburgh. We’re hoping to fascinate you. To help you make discoveries or connections. To help you learn something new and useful. If you join, you can be entered to win a giveaway. Ready to join yet? Want to learn more? Visit https://www.publicsource.org/emailcourse Not ready to join the course yet?  Follow along with us anyway for insights and course updates. And let us know: What does it mean to you to be a Pittsburgher? Can you be a “true Pittsburgher” if you aren’t born here? What’s your weirdest Pittsburgh story? Tag us @PublicSourcePA on Twitter or @publicsource on Instagram using #LearnPittsburgh to share your story. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI