Posted in DATA , Local Government , SALARIES DATA State salaries 2014 – See what public employees make in their jobs by Alexandra Kanik December 26, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X We at PublicSource believe it’s important to make the salaries of city, county and state employees easy for you to see because you, the taxpayer, provide the funds so that public employees can serve you. Remember as you look at the salaries that though some may seem lower than private sector jobs, public employees receive generous pensions (one of the the items that often put cities and states in jeopardy regarding their budgets) and benefits. Explore the data for cities, counties and the states on our site in the coming days and let us know if you find something that you believe we should report on further. It’s your money. Top salaries per department Average salary per employee, by agency FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Explore the full dataset online Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Data