Posted in Local Government Innamorato raises minimum wage for county employees, mirroring law Fitzgerald vetoed Full-time county employees will earn at least $22 per hour by 2027, Innamorato announced on her first full day as Allegheny County executive. by Charlie Wolfson January 3, 2024 January 3, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Allegheny County Executive Sara Innamorato speaks at her inauguration on Jan. 2, at the Byham Theater in downtown Pittsburgh. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Allegheny County executive Sara Innamorato made quick work of setting herself apart from her predecessor Wednesday, announcing a wage hike for potentially hundreds of county employees. Innamorato’s new policy, which sets a wage floor for full-time county workers at $18 per hour in 2024 and $22 per hour by 2027, is similar to a 2023 law passed by County Council then overturned by a court challenge filed by the administration of then-Executive Rich Fitzgerald. Innamorato said on the campaign trail she supported the bill, and made good on that statement just a day after she was sworn in as Fitzgerald’s successor . She said the new policy is vital to retaining and attracting workers to carry out the work of county government. “Once I learned we had 1,000 open positions at the county, I knew improving our workforce pay and benefits was going to be an immediate action for my administration,” Innamorato said at a press conference outside her County Courthouse office. It’s unclear exactly how many employees will benefit from the action, though Innamorato’s spokesperson said “hundreds” of employees will see an increase when the $22 floor goes into effect. A PublicSource analysis showed that more than 1,000 full-time employees earned less than that in 2022, though some may have received raises since then. Innamorato also announced a new wage floor for part-time workers, increased from $12 to $15 per hour. The increases will not immediately affect union workers, though Innamorato indicated equivalent hikes would be incorporated into each union’s next collective bargaining agreement. Thousands of county workers are unionized, encompassing public safety workers and service workers, among others. Local Government Innamorato sworn in as Allegheny executive, asking county not to fear change Innamorato is Allegheny County’s first new chief executive in 12 years, and she described a county government that has fallen short on social services and more. The announcement suggests an immediate shift in the relationship between the executive and legislative branches of county government. Innamorato took an issue that divided the two sides so deeply last year that Fitzgerald and council ended up in court over the legality of the wage legislation. A judge later sided with the executive branch, leaving Innamorato with  sole authority to set wages. She gave council what it wants in this case. Innamorato said the move is already accounted for in the 2024 budget and that she would need to do further work with her budget staff to determine resulting costs for future budget years. She said any cost estimate would take into account the savings associated with employee retention and a revitalized workforce. She also announced adjusted employee benefits aimed at improving retention and hiring. Employees will receive three weeks of paid vacation, with added time for long-serving employees, and they will no longer have to wait to access sick time and parental leave, she said. “The county has record low unemployment right now, and that means hiring is competitive,” Innamorato said. “And the county cannot compete if we are not recognizing the work-life balance that people need to be successful.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting She also announced prospective employees will no longer be subjected to drug tests, except when collective bargaining agreements require it. Charlie Wolfson is PublicSource’s local government reporter and a Report for America corps member. He can be reached at charlie@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , Employment Charlie Wolfson charlie@publicsource.org x Charlie Wolfson is an enterprise reporter for Pittsburgh's Public Source, focusing on local government accountability and politics in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. He was a Report for America corps... More by Charlie Wolfson