Posted in Daily report , posts June 26, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 26, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: District Attorney’s office seeks death penalty in homicide case Theodore Smedley of Troy Hill is already awaiting trial for one homicide , but was arrested again on Thursday for a second murder case involving two victims. D.A. Stephen Zappala Jr. will seek the death penalty for Smedley’s three murder charges. Hollidaysburg: Attorney General’s office searches monastery The A.G.’s office is investigating the Altoona-Johnstown Roman Catholic Diocese as part of an ongoing child molestation case that spans almost three decades and 20 different priests. On Thursday, agents of the A.G.’s office searched the St. Bernardine Monastery, which may have a connection to that case. Harrisburg: Time’s running out for a budget compromise Gov. Tom Wolf’s administration is still talking, but the House votes on the Republican budget plan on Saturday. So far there hasn’t been any movement from the Democrats to introduce bills or amendments, and the belief that a compromise will be reached is decreasing. Harrisburg: Challenge to NRA gun law The Commonwealth Court ruled a law unconstitutional that made it easy for the National Rifle Association and other membership associations to sue on behalf of a member. The provision was merged with a law regarding a different subject, and was condemned as unconstitutional from the start. For more information, see our post on it. Statewide: Where do you rank on the Census map? Based on new estimates, Millennials are now the most sizeable age group in the state, while the elderly over 70 are the fastest growing population. NATIONAL The Affordable Care Act is here to stay On Thursday, the Supreme Court voted 6-3 to keep the Affordable Care Act in play. The A.C.A. means that health insurance subsidies are available everywhere for low and moderate-income Americans who qualify. Vaccination required for California kids A bill approved on Thursday by state lawmakers made vaccinations for school children mandatory, with medical conditions as the only exemption. Formerly, parents were able to withhold vaccinating children for moral or religious reasons. Second prison worker charged with aiding killers’ escape Officer Gene Palmer is the prison guard at the Clinton Correctional Facility who’s accused of delivering the power tools-laced meat to Richard Matt and David Sweat in exchange for some of the prisoners’ artwork. IN OTHER NEWS Nudists charged with stealing water The owners of a nudist resort in California have been charged with trespassing and piping water from a neighboring creek in order to fill the camp’s pool. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.