Posted in Education Higher-ed reporting gets a boost in Pittsburgh as part of partnership between PublicSource and Open Campus by PublicSource contributor September 18, 2020 September 20, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The University of Pittsburgh's campus in Oakland. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Pittsburgh’s nonprofit newsroom PublicSource and the national Open Campus network are partnering to ensure a watchful eye remains on higher education in Southwestern Pennsylvania when it matters the most. The coronavirus pandemic is derailing students’ education plans, imperiling their health, safety and employment prospects. The uncertainties created by the pandemic have also put pressure on higher-ed institutions, from how students and employees return to campus to how colleges and universities respond to their fluctuating finances. At the same time, the region will be looking to its colleges to help it recover. As new challenges arise, PublicSource and Open Campus recognize the Pittsburgh region needs a dedicated higher-ed reporter. Today, we announced our search for the right journalist to fill the position. Open Campus is a national nonprofit news organization focused on improving local coverage of higher education by working with newsrooms like PublicSource to add dedicated reporters in their communities. “College gets a lot of national attention, but it rarely gets the local attention it deserves,” said Scott Smallwood, co-founder of Open Campus. “That’s why we’re excited to collaborate with PublicSource — a mission-driven news organization in a city where higher education really matters.” The PublicSource newsroom in Pittsburgh, Pa. — founded in 2011 — currently covers K-12 education, local government, economic development, the environment, health, public safety and race relations. The mission of the newsroom is to inspire critical thinking and bold ideas through local journalism rooted in facts, excellence, diverse voices and pursuit of transparency. “We are thrilled to partner with Open Campus,” said PublicSource Executive Director Mila Sanina. “Through this partnership, we hope to extend our mission of informing residents of the Pittsburgh region. It will help us serve the public interest in ways that make our region better, especially because higher education is a pillar of our local economy and intellectual infrastructure. This is a big win for Pittsburgh.” The Pittsburgh economy is often talked about as a phoenix rising from the collapse of steel and now dominated by ‘eds and meds.’ The major tentpoles of our region are again under great stress due to the coronavirus pandemic and its economic fallout. PublicSource and Open Campus believe the engaged citizens of the Pittsburgh region deserve passionate and innovative journalism about higher ed as it plays a key role in our economy and society’s future. If you’re the right person for the job or know someone who might be, see the job posting here . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: campus , education , On Instagram