Posted in Environment , Local Government , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Could fracking in Ohio be causing earthquakes? by Natasha Khan March 14, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Ohio state officials are looking into whether a Northeastern Ohio fracking operation could have caused a series of earthquakes in Mahoning County, which borders Pennsylvania, on Monday, according to a Columbus Dispatch news article . On Monday, state officials ordered Hilcorp Energy, a Texas-based energy and drilling company, to shut down an active fracking operation near Lowellville after four earthquakes were felt in the area. From The Columbus Dispatch : “It’s an area which (before 2011) had no history of earthquakes,” said John Armbruster, a retired Columbia University geology professor who had worked with Ohio officials to monitor a recent series of earthquakes tied to a fracking-waste injection well near Youngstown. “It looks very, very suspicious.” The state said Monday’s earthquakes were not caused by injection wells. If they were caused by a fracking well, it would be the first such event in Ohio and maybe in the United States. Yesterday, ODNR [Ohio Department of Natural Resources] spokesman Mark Bruce emailed a statement: “Activity will remain suspended until further notice. The decision was made out of an abundance of caution after analyzing location and magnitude data provided by U.S. Geological Services.” PublicSource wrote about a group of residents who attempted to get a ban on fracking passed in Youngstown after a series of earthquakes hit the area in 2011 and early 2012. Read the full story here. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy , Marcellus Shale Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan