Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Watch Pittsburgh Police Chief Cameron McLay’s DNC speech by Jeffrey Benzing July 27, 2016 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pittsburgh Police Chief Cameron McLay had the national spotlight last night at the Democratic National Convention, where he spoke about national tensions between police and black communities. “The controversial officer-involved shootings that have occurred since Ferguson have created a level of tension between police and our communities, while at the same time, there’s been a  great deal of work going on to improve those relationships,” McLay said during a prime-time convention slot. Among other key points, McLay spoke of the disparate impact the justice system has on minority communities nationwide. He also underlined the the fragile nature of relationships between police and residents, particularly in the wake of of police shootings of black men in Minnesota and Louisiana, followed by the murder of eight police officers in 10 days. Read a full transcript from the DNC here. On July 31, PublicSource is hosting an event about Pittsburgh communities healing in the wake of neighborhood violence. Visit our Facebook event page for more details. Note: McLay does not follow the text exactly but hits on the same points. Reach Jeffrey Benzing at jbenzing@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @jabenzing . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice