Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Police union head wants slow reform by Jeffrey Benzing May 11, 2015 February 27, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X How can police protect themselves from Congress and the Justice Department amid increasing public demands that departments atone for a growing list of incidents that show alleged racial profiling and questionable deadly force? Literally slow reform. As POLITICO reports , Jim Pasco, the politically connected executive director of the Fraternal Order of Police, wants to draw out the reform debate with a congressional commission so ideas unfavorable for police lose traction. As union head, Pasco is fighting numerous efforts he feels could harm police, including a proliferation of federal investigations of departments and a bill to slow the stream of military equipment given to departments. Instead of acting immediately, Pasco wants lawmakers to spend more time considering the impact their choices could have on policing in the coming decades. According to the story: It’s an approach reminiscent of the NRA’s response to urgent calls for new gun control measures after the mass school shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut in 2012. The group commissioned a private task force led by Asa Hutchinson, now the governor of Arkansas, which came back four months after the shooting with a recommendation that schools arm staff members. The Justice Department opened a civil rights investigation last week into alleged abuses by the Baltimore Police Department. The city’s mayor requested the review as alleged abuse by police gained national attention after the death of Freddie Grey, who died from a severed spinal cord after a “rough ride” in a police van. Pasco does not like these “pattern and practices” reviews, and instead favors “collaborative reviews” which are seen as less hostile toward police, according to POLITICO. As the story notes, Baltimore’s union chapter wanted the Justice Department to also to investigate the mayor’s influence over policing. As head of a giant and hugely influential union, which is clearly a major player on law enforcement issues, Pasco is closely connected to both Republicans and Democrats. Now, members of both parties are interested in police reform. The Fraternal Order of Police flexed its muscle last year by blocking the confirmation of Debo Adegbile to lead the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor According to POLITICO, the Fraternal Order of Police spent $220,000 in lobbying last year. While Pasco wants slow study, others want immediate action. Rep. Hakeem Jeffries (D-N.Y.) said many have run out of patience with committees. “The Congressional Black Caucus is committed in my view to get something done with the fierce urgency of now,” Jeffries told POLITICO. Reach Jeffrey Benzing at 412-315-0265 or at jbenzing@publicsource.org. Follow him on Twitter @jabenzing . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Criminal Justice