Posted in Daily report , posts July 7, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 7, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Harrisburg: Budget negotiations resume The new fiscal year begins with limited funds available for state spending. State employees will still be paid, but social service groups could lose out. The Wolf administration and lawmakers resumed talks Monday. Allegheny County: Asbestos-related deaths higher than national average Pennsylvania is one of six states with asbestos deaths more than 50 percent higher than the national average. Allegheny County: Bill backlog The Allegheny County Council has 63 ordinances awaiting votes. Many of them have stayed longer than the 90-day maximum, but there is no penalty for letting bills linger. Council President John DeFazio said that everything pending a vote will be decided by the end of the year. Philadelphia: Prepping for the mayor’s transition Although inauguration day isn’t until Jan. 4, 2016, Mayor Michael Nutter and his administration are already taking steps to smooth the transition . A project director was hired to focus solely on developing a plan so that Philly residents won’t even notice the change. Statewide: Family Dollar settlement A merger between Family Dollar and Dollar Tree was challenged by 17 states. As settlement, Family Dollar needs to sell 330 stores to other competitors, 19 of which will be stores in Pennsylvania ordered to be sold by Attorney General Kathleen Kane. Statewide: Clean Vehicle Corridors Act The bill would introduce new infrastructure for vehicles that use alternative fuel methods , like electric cars. If the bill is approved, it would allow alternative fuel vehicles to use HOV lanes and have their own parking spots, and would install new fueling stations along interstate highways. NATIONAL Fighting corruption on the border In southern Texas, more public officials are convicted of federal crimes than any other region in the country. The Rio Grande Valley Public Corruption Task Force seeks to expose corruption at all levels — whether it’s a school board or the state Legislature. The region’s complex economy is based on border culture, where the rich and poor live in close proximity. Driverless cars aren’t just safer, they reduce emissions Autonomous taxis aim to take the human error out of driving, but studies by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory show that the tiny, pod-like vehicles will also reduce emissions by up to 94 percent of current levels of gas-powered cars. Colorado experiment lowers teen pregnancy rate With funds from a private grant, Colorado offered free long-acting birth control implants to teenagers and poor women. Over six years, the birth rate for teenagers dropped 40 percent and the rate of abortions dropped 42 percent. Researchers say that having free access to contraceptives will also help reduce poverty over time. World Cup Win The U.S. Women’s National Soccer Team defeated Japan 5-2 on Sunday, winning the cup for the first time in 16 years. IN OTHER NEWS Skinny Oreos Mondelez International is adding a new Oreo cookie to the roster: Oreo Thins . They arrived in China last year to enthusiastic success, so the thinner cousin of the regular cookie will hit stores next week in the U.S. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.