Posted in Community storytelling Alone on Turkey Day? We want to hear from you about it. Ahead of Thanksgiving, PublicSource is seeking perspectives on what it is like to celebrate the holiday alone. by Rich Lord November 6, 2023 November 13, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Thanksgiving — a complicated holiday rooted in colonialism — is often associated today with hearty foods and good company. PublicSource Managing Editor Rich Lord has spent upwards of 45 Thanksgivings in Pittsburgh. Stephanie Mirah, the audience growth and engagement producer, is about to spend her first Turkey Day in the area. While Lord has a fuzzy memory of spending at least one holiday alone in college, both have typically spent the day surrounded by family or friends. We’ve known people, though, who spend the holiday alone — some by choice, some because they don’t see another option. Are you expecting to spend Thanksgiving alone this November? Share your experience below in 200 words or less. We’ll publish your accounts and observations Thanksgiving week along with resources and places to celebrate a community Thanksgiving. Tell us your story: Δ Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow , November , Pittsburgh , Thanksgiving Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord