Posted in Daily report , posts The Daily Report: Aug. 31, 2015 by Jeffrey Benzing August 30, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Statewide: Fraud investigator resigns amid porn scandal A top official in the state’s Office of the Inspector General resigned Thursday after his name showed up in emails released in connection with “porngate.” Anthony Fiore, who had received emails while in the Attorney General’s office, believes he’s an innocent casualty. Montgomery County: Shooting instructor jailed A reckless trigger squeeze killed Trooper David Kedra last fall, and now a former State Police firearms instructor Richard Schroeter has been sentenced to two weeks in jail . The shooting was an accident, and the fallen trooper’s family had been pressing for a manslaughter charge. Chester: District can’t pay teachers The state failed to pay aid money to one of the state’s poorest school districts. Now that district says it can’t afford to pay teachers and staff, though teachers voted to work for free. The missed payment is a consequence of the budget stalemate in Harrisburg. Chester County: Deputy cleared in courthouse shooting Deadly force was justified when a sheriff’s deputy fatally shot Curtis Smith — a White House wall jumper — after he pulled a knife and attempted to stab another deputy, the Chester County district attorney said.  The DA said the shots fired Tuesday were intended to protect officials and citizens at the courthouse. Steelers: Strong showing from Vick Quarterback Michael Vick made his debut as a Steeler with a 63-yard-pass on his first play. Vick had practiced with his new teammates for two days. But the Bills pretty well trounced the Steelers, 43-19, in the preseason game . NATIONAL Obama wants action on climate change President Barack Obama is expected to use a visit to Alaska Monday to call for urgent action on climate change . The remarks will be made several days after the administration gave Shell permission to drill for oil and gas in the Arctic Ocean. Arrest made in murder of Texas deputy Alleged gunman Shannon Miles was arrested Saturday in connection with the killing of a Houston-area sheriff’s deputy . Deputy Darren Goforth was fired on while pumping gas. He was a 10-year veteran of the force. Probe examines Virginia jail death Jamycheal Mitchell died in a Virginia jail after being held four months for the alleged theft of $5 worth of snack foods. A judge had ordered that he be transferred to a mental hospital. He was not moved, and now police are examining the Aug. 19 death. Katrina recovery leaves many forgotten It’s been 10 years since Hurricane Katrina devastated New Orleans and the Gulf Coast. Much of the city has recovered, but the black middle-class residents of New Orleans East feel that they’ve been forgotten . WORLD First Turkish-U.S. airstrikes Turkey launched airstrikes Friday against the Islamic State. Initial Turkish airstrikes occurred in July, but the latest action is the first time the nation’s warplanes have hit targets as part of a U.S.-led coalition. IN OTHER NEWS Famous neurologist dies at 82 Oliver Sacks, a neurologist and best-selling author known for examining the secrets of the brain, died Sunday in New York . Among his famous writings is “The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat.” The daily report was compiled by Jeffrey Benzing. You can reach him with questions or suggestions at jbenzing@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI