Posted in HEALTH , Local Government , On the beat , posts GOP candidates releasing healthcare plans by Halle Stockton August 18, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X When Republicans in Congress couldn’t finish the job of repealing the Affordable Care Act, often referred to as Obamacare, the nation’s health care was positioned to become a major issue among Republican presidential contenders — and that it has. Today, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker became the first of the more prominent candidates to release an extensive healthcare plan that would replace the existing law, according to a story by The Hill . The biggest change would be dismantling the existing tax credits under ObamaCare and replacing them with a system that doles out federal dollars based on an individual’s age, instead of income. Older populations would receive more money than people in younger age groups. Walker’s plan also includes two measures favored by the GOP: It would allow people to purchase health care across state lines, and allow associations of small businesses and farmers in order for them to negotiate. Walker also gives states a choice. His plan would allow states to determine which plan benefits to require. It would also give states federal grants to expand high-risk pools to ensure people with existing conditions don’t lose coverage — keeping in place one of the most popular pieces of ObamaCare. The states would be required to enact certain Medicaid programs, which Walker said would act as the safety net for many of the newer Obamacare consumers. The Hill points out that Walker claims his plan won’t add to the deficit, but that he doesn’t offer details on how to reduce costs while enacting his reforms. Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) also has a healthcare plan that he threw into the mix late Monday, largely a repeat from a six-month-old op-ed, according to another story from T he Hill . Rubio’s plan includes insurance reforms, changes to Medicare, and, most prominently, a reliance on ‘ refundable, advanceable tax credits,’ used to purchase health insurance. “The value of these credits should increase every year, and we should set the tax preference for employer-sponsored insurance on a glide path to ensure that it will equal the level of the credits within a decade,” he wrote, using the same language as his previous op-ed in Fox News in March . Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal — a presidential candidate who performed well alongside candidate Carly Fiorina in the Republicans’ first ‘undercard’ debate — released a healthcare plan last year. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor His plan is more extreme than the other two proposed this week because it would aim to “return tax and spending levels to where they would have been if the law had never passed, and build a free market alternative from scratch,” according to a story by the Washington Examiner . Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or at hstockton@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @HalleStockton . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton