Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource newsroom wins 13 awards for its reporting by Halle Stockton May 31, 2019 May 31, 2019 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Among the winners: the 'Let's talk about race' project, the investigation into a police contractor; and 'The Fix' opioids reporting project. Race and racism, the human impact of the opioid epidemic and questionable contracting by city police are among the stories PublicSource covered in 2018 that have been honored with 13 state and regional awards in recent weeks. ‘Let’s Talk about Race’ is a community-driven project and, therefore, the multiple awards it has received, we share with the community. The project began as a commitment to the ongoing conversation around examining local racial attitudes and how people from our community perceive race. PublicSource journalists and people from in and around Pittsburgh helped to create more than three dozen powerful stories about the topic in 2018, and it continues to be a topic we’re dedicated to keeping front of mind. The project won: first place for feature writing in the Society of Professional Journalists’ Keystone State Chapter Spotlight Contest; a Robert L. Vann Media Award in public affairs presented by the Pittsburgh Black Media Federation; and a Golden Quill in the history/culture category presented by the Press Club of Western Pennsylvania. ‘The Fix’ was a series focused on telling stories about the opioid epidemic in the Pittsburgh region. Two of the several compelling stories published introspection and deep emotion and were recognized for it. PublicSource reporter Brittany Hailer wrote ‘The Men Who Didn’t Disappear’ — the story of two brothers from Beltzhoover who battled addiction, experienced loss and have turned their lives around. Longform , an online publication focused on narrative craft and extraordinary stories, republished the story for its national audience. The story won a Vann Media Award in the enterprise category and a Golden Quill in feature writing. Brian Broome, a freelance writer, also wrote a story that was a hybrid of his personal experience with addiction and reporting about how black and white people experiencing addiction are treated differently. The story headlined ‘In the hypocrisy of the opioid epidemic, white means victim, black means addict.’ was republished by The Guardian online. It also won a Vann Media Award in the health/science/environment category. A PublicSource reporting team last year also looked at how problems with Pittsburgh’s police technology launched a federal investigation, internal probes and sparked a whistleblower lawsuit. The reporting prompted Pittsburgh City Council to create a special oversight committee to review contracts with private vendors. The investigation won a first place in enterprise reporting in the SPJ Spotlight Contest and a Golden Quill in the enterprise/investigative category. PublicSource partners with other newsrooms in Pittsburgh and beyond. Two stories produced in partnership with Pittsburgh Magazine were honored with awards: Mary Niederberger’s story about Superintendent Anthony Hamlet’s attempts to fix legacy problems in Pittsburgh Public Schools won a Golden Quill for a magazine news feature and was a finalist for a Vann Media Award. Oliver Morrison’s story, titled ‘How green is our city?’ also won a Golden Quill for science/environment writing. Brittany Hailer and Jourdan Hicks at the 55th Annual Golden Quills Awards dinner. (Photo courtesy of Brittany Hailer) Other winners and finalists include: The Failing the Future project, a series focused on funding disparities among Southwestern Pennsylvania school districts, won second place for enterprise in the SPJ Spotlight contest. Its anchor story comparing the Sto-Rox and Montour school districts was a finalist for a Vann Media Award. A two-part probe into the cyber security practices with the City of Pittsburgh’s government won third place for enterprise in the SPJ Spotlight contest. A story about the street medicine movement led by Pittsburgh Dr. Jim Withers won first place for health and medical reporting in the SPJ Spotlight contest. Other finalists for the Golden Quills included an explainer video on civil disobedience ; a video about a Squirrel Hill florist following the Tree of Life attack; and a story about the role Carnegie Mellon University plays in shaping the future of war . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting We appreciate the recognition from awards committees. But even more important is the trust of people who shared their stories with PublicSource and the opportunity to serve the people who visit PublicSource.org, get our newsletters and attend our events. For those of you who support our journalism financially, thank you. And for those who don’t yet, please consider becoming a member with a donation that helps to ensure the future of in-depth, quality local journalism in Pittsburgh. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton