Posted in Education Updated: PPS adds student voices to school board In an effort to increase student input, PPS leaders passed a resolution adding two non-voting student positions to the school board. by Lajja Mistry June 27, 2024 June 27, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pittsburgh Public Schools board members and staff during a public hearing on the district's budget in December 2023.  (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Updated (6/27/24): The PPS school board unanimously approved a policy to appoint two non-voting student board representatives during a legislative meeting on Wednesday. The proposal — first presented in January — was taken up again by the board after months of review from the policy committee. The board will appoint two students for a two-year term starting in August. Devon Taliaferro, board member and co-chair of the Policy Committee, said the new policy will support the board to make decisions that are focused on student outcomes and give students an opportunity to be part of a governing body. Updated (1/25/24): The Pittsburgh Public Schools board on Wednesday passed a motion to table a resolution for appointing student board representatives, shelving it indefinitely. Board member Jamie Piotrowski said she supports amplifying student voices and the board should create a consistent program through the policy committee instead of passing a resolution. She added that passing a resolution to appoint two students would not represent the whole student body, including many English language learners or students with disabilities. “This is a resolution that then becomes very difficult to find in Board Docs and then as the board changes, this program could essentially disappear,” she said. Board member Sala Udin, who introduced the initial resolution and voted against tabling, said he made many changes to the resolution based on recommendations from board members, adding that the board would be “sending a very negative message to the students” if they tabled the resolution. “We need to be lifting them up, not muzzling them,” he said. The board plans to have conversations in the upcoming policy committee meetings to decide a plan forward. Reported (1/23/24) : Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Pittsburgh school board considers adding student seats Pittsburgh Public Schools is expected to vote tomorrow on a proposal to add two high school student representatives to its board. Those in support of the resolution , proposed by board member Sala Udin, include students who say they lack input in decisions about their education. “We must ensure that the voices of students not only have room in the superintendent’s vocal point but also the actual policymaking body of this system,” said Allderdice High School senior Pavel Marin, during a public hearing on Monday night. The resolution, if passed, would add two students from 11th and 12th grade to serve as liaisons between the board and the student body, and they will be required to submit a monthly report. Students would be selected by a committee of high school principals and the superintendent would make a suggestion to the board before the start of the next school year. The students would not be given voting power or access to executive sessions in which privileged information is discussed. Allderdice senior Pavel Marin gives his testimony, supporting the resolution to add student representatives to the board on Jan. 22. (Photo by Lajja Mistry/PublicSource) During a public board meeting last week when the resolution was introduced, board member Devon Taliaferro urged the board to examine their governing process before adding student voices. She said the board should explore other options that involve more students such as the Superintendent’s Student Advisory Council [SSAC], a student-led panel that discusses school-related issues with the administration. School officials, while saying they support more student input, appear undecided on the proposal. Board member Dwayne Barker said while he wants to prioritize student voices, he does not want to rush the process of adding student representatives to the board. The board could hold multiple listening sessions at schools, led by students, to increase student voice in the district, he added. “We know it’s long overdue,” said Barker. “Student voice is certainly important.” Board President Gene Walker said he supported the idea of student board members but the board should work to clearly define the students’ role to create a positive experience. Pittsburgh Public Schools board member Gene Walker. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) “There’s some work that we need to do internally, from a governance standpoint, to put us in the right position to be able to do that effectively,” he said. In a written statement, former board member Pam Harbin said the resolution confines the district to a single method and the board should consider other ways, such as electing student representatives. She added that the board should take feedback from students to make the process meaningful and equitable. Last year, the PPS board gave itself a failing grade in a self-evaluation, as reported by WESA . Za’Morrie Reeves, a junior at Allderdice, intends to apply to be a student board representative if the resolution is passed. Reeves, who is also part of the SSAC, said he believes student board members would involve students at policy-making and districtwide levels as opposed to SSAC’s work in individual schools. “I can help by just being a voice for those students who either don’t feel comfortable using their voice or don’t know where to use your voice,” he said. Lajja Mistry is the K-12 education reporter at PublicSource. She can be reached at lajja@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allderdice , education , Pittsburgh , PPS , PPS board , Public Schools , Sala Udin , SSAC , student representation Lajja Mistry lajja@publicsource.org Lajja is the K-12 education reporter at Pittsburgh's Public Source. Originally from India, she moved to the States in 2021 to pursue a master’s degree in journalism from the University of Southern California.... More by Lajja Mistry