Posted in FIRST PERSON Mulling an environmental disaster in a Colorado bar surfaced my deep (and complicated) Pa. roots I spent five years feeling heartsick over Pittsburgh before I threw in the towel and returned home. I’m trading crisp mountain air for deep history and connection. by First-person essay by Corina Pittman April 19, 2024 September 24, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Corina Pittman looks out on Penn Avenue on Tuesday, April 9, 2024, in the Strip District. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Editor’s note: PublicSource is dedicated to sharing a wide variety of voices. This first-person essay is part of a collection focused on the experiences of living in the Pittsburgh region. These essays highlight both the unique charm and the common struggles of our community. Discover more perspectives at PublicSource First Person . I’m at a bar in Grand County, Colorado about a week after the 2023 East Palestine train derailment and returning home to Pittsburgh is the only thing I can think about. My coworkers are ordering $11 cocktails and the bar TVs show professional skiers dropping onto remote peaks from helicopters. There are three screens and each one is always playing a different breathless looping clip. I fix my attention on a clip of a man plunging through deep snow somewhere on another continent to make it easier to avoid conversation. I feel both sick with longing for home and horrified by another environmental disaster in the same region I am desperate to return to. This was my fifth winter away from Pittsburgh and my first in Colorado. After graduating from a small college in Asheville, North Carolina, I moved out west to chase low-paying seasonal jobs in stunningly beautiful and almost surreal mountain towns that I could never afford to visit otherwise. By the time I landed in Grand County for a winter job at a ski resort, though, the West had largely lost its romantic mystique. Even in the best of circumstances, Pittsburgh is a difficult place to leave behind. In my experience, the children of Pittsburgh families that have scattered across the country still think of themselves as yinzers, no matter how long they’ve been away. Something about this city haunts the minds and hearts of its inhabitants long after they physically leave. Pittsburgh’s skyline draws memories for Corina Pittman on Tuesday, April 9, 2024, in the Strip District. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) My coworkers are talking to a group of electricians stationed here for a month-long stint of wiring newly built multi-million dollar homes. Even in the depths of winter, the demand for construction labor far outstrips supply, and most of the people who work in Grand County can’t afford to live there, at least not permanently. Like us, the electricians live in housing provided by their employer. Most people I meet in Grand County do not actually live there, and of those that do, few actually grew up there. We are strangers among strangers, and the connections forged to people and place here seem incredibly flimsy compared to connections forged in Pittsburgh. Community storytelling My American Dream ended on a deflated air mattress in a run-down Squirrel Hill apartment Last year, I fled my turbulent homeland in Lebanon to join my sister in Pittsburgh. I’d expected prosperity and opportunity but found instead potholes, poverty and racism. Just like so many Pittsburgh families, mine has lived in the same handful of South Hills neighborhoods going back four or more generations. My grandparents and great-grandparents grew up in Baldwin, Mt. Oliver, Carrick, Jefferson Hills, South Side and Clairton. My knowledge of these neighborhoods extends far beyond familiarity. There are memories in every hollow, on every street corner, in every empty lot and in every new development. My family history is folded into every hill, and the same landscape that shaped the lives of my relatives before me continues to shape my own. Corina Pittman walks through the cemetery outside St. Wendelin Church in Carrick. Pittman grew up down the city steps from the church, where her great-grandparents are buried. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting I grew up in a house just a short walk from the house my mother grew up in, and the house her father grew up in, and the house his mother grew up in. I went to church where my great-grandmother was baptized. I went to the same high school as, not just my parents, but some of my grandparents. Sometimes I call places by a name that was discarded before I was born because the old name was taught to me by those who knew it that way. I know what the new office parks and shopping centers used to be, and I know which places are exactly as they were when my grandparents were children. I know which homes used to belong to relatives I’ve never met. So many of my strongest Pittsburgh memories and connections were forged long before I was born. I grew up listening to stories that were set in places right before my eyes, and the memories of my family became almost indistinguishable from my own. Corina Pittman looks towards the streets she grew up in from the city steps outside St. Wendelin Church, Carrick, where her great-grandmother was baptized. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) This connection to place through memories that are not my own underwrites every interaction I have with other Pittsburghers. The city is full of families that have lived on the same street since before World War II, and the past lives on through their lives just as it does in mine. Even if we were born after most of the mills shuttered, every Pittsburgher can still remember the glory days. We are united by a shared history that is so vivid and immediate that even young children have an understanding of how things used to be. There is no such understanding for me in Grand County, no deeper connection, no shared understanding. Almost everyone I encounter seems desperately lonely, alienated from any real community as they navigate whatever short-term circumstance brought them here. We pass through like ships in the night, and no one will keep the memory of our time there alive. History lives and dies by the seasons. We are strangers among strangers and the electricians at the bar want us to go home with them. Men outnumber women noticeably in Grand County, and the barrage of advances from lonely men far from their homes is almost constant. My friends and I are well practiced at sidestepping these unwanted advances by this point in the winter. The electricians are not even the first to ask us that evening and they leave to walk home through the snow once they realize that none of us have even the slightest desire to go to whatever overcrowded hovel their company threw them in. A Steelers flag flies along a street close to where Pittman grew up in Pittsburgh’s South Hills. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) I spend the rest of the night vacantly staring across the bar and feeling unfairly hateful toward the subjects of the precisely edited clips of skiers gliding through snow while wondering what will become of all of the men, women and children currently breathing vinyl chloride-ridden air. I try to imagine the public reaction to a disaster of similar scale occurring here rather than East Palestine and wonder if the public would perceive it as a greater environmental tragedy. A mass poisoning event in one of Colorado’s remote mountain valleys and ski destinations might seem more striking. I think not just about the derailment but of a cancer cluster thought to be related to fracking near the neighborhood in which I grew up. I think about the sinkhole that opened in a neighbor’s yard after the mine below collapsed. I think about a tale from my grandfather’s youth where he described watching burning patches of oil float down the Monongahela River. Every retiree I see enjoying a day of skiing reminds me of my grandparents who did not live long enough to enjoy retirement. I never found the derailment particularly shocking. It was another poisoning event in a region where the environment and its people have been treated as dispensable for generations. FIRST PERSON The payoff and pain of working with rescue animals taught me a lot about being human Volunteering in animal shelters for 13 years has brought knowledge, understanding and empathy. But it hasn’t been without heartache. My grandfather died of brain cancer just before his 62nd birthday. He grew up in Clairton, and spent much of his life working for U.S. Steel. I often wonder whether he would still be alive today if he hadn’t been exposed to the toxic industrial pollution that so many in Southwestern Pennsylvania live with. Corina Pittman looks out to the city skyline for a portrait April 9 in the Strip District. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) It didn’t feel fair that some people’s grandparents get to spend their retirement skiing while mine are in an early grave. I didn’t want to be the kind of person who resents old people enjoying their retirement and I didn’t want the alienation to continue any longer than it had to. I desperately missed Pittsburgh even as I felt almost obsessively angry over some of its more tragic chapters. The sloping streets and lines of houses in Carrick, close to Pittman’s childhood home. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) The longer I stayed in Colorado, the greater the Pittsburgh in my mind grew. It became a hulking object of desire that dominated my thoughts. I was filtering every experience through the haze of my homesickness. Every resentment I bore toward the transient lifestyle I experienced in Colorado contrasted with my deeply rooted relationship with Pittsburgh. Over the years spent away my feelings of homesickness waxed and waned. I counted down the days to every return trip home, and I dreaded the inevitable tearful embraces with family that bookended my visits. I watched political and environmental turmoil from afar and wished I could return home to make sense of it. I also loved so many aspects of my life beyond Pittsburgh, and I knew turning my back on them would be difficult. I spent many wonderful summers working in the mountains of North Carolina, attended a college that I loved, and explored some of the most beautiful places in the Mountain West for the better part of a year. I felt profound gratitude for my time in these places, and I was always aware that I was extremely fortunate to live there, even for a short time. My parents and other relatives never had similar opportunities, and I didn’t want to squander mine. My gratitude was mixed, though, with a strange guilt over my overbearing homesickness while I lived in places where I would otherwise feel lucky merely to visit. FIRST PERSON NYC never measured up to the bar set by Pittsburgh Would a return to my hometown after 20 years in and around New York prove the perfect move for a mom determined to say “yes” and kindle community? Here’s how it went for me. By February 2023 I knew that I needed to come home. By March I was back in Pittsburgh. I left Colorado without much fanfare. I was relieved to finally have the mountains at my back. Pittsburgh has returned to its rightful place, external rather than internal to my life. I now have the frame of mind to better appreciate the world beyond. Even so, it is difficult to imagine myself ever feeling at rest anywhere else. Corina Pittman works in youth development in the Greater Pittsburgh area and can be reached at pittmancorina13@gmail.com . Read more essays on the Pittsburgh experience: How I celebrated Pittsburgh’s neighborhoods — and why I left them After building my film career documenting neighborhoods from Dormont to Manchester to Sharpsburg, I made the move to Portland, Oregon. by First-person video by Dean Bog Unbroken record: The 59th running of a local vinyl and CD convention brought together regulars, first-timers and pros The Pittsburgh Record and CD Convention brings together music lovers of all ages, from all walks of life and places far and wide, to a town where vinyl is still groovy. by Jess Daninhirsch Active aging in Pittsburgh: A guide for staying vibrant and engaged Explore dance, biking, pickleball and community resources to enhance your golden years. by Christine Graziano Schizophrenia, stigma and systems hold so many back, which made it tough to celebrate my hard-won tenure 17 years passed between enrollment in a graduate program that didn’t want me and receipt of tenure at Pitt. Along the way, I learned the hard way that the mental health system often doesn’t listen closely to its consumers. by First-person essay by Nev Jones Photo essay: Canonsburg’s outsized Fourth of July parade sees tens of thousands celebrate the nation’s history, spirit On a holiday that celebrates America, amid a polarizing political season, a town that has been part of the national narrative in many ways comes together to get its red, white and blue on. by Stephanie Strasburg When my father died, another tragedy hit home: The newspaper obituary is on its death bed Obituaries helped communities to share information about their losses. They are also invaluable research tools. Changes in the newspaper industry threaten this resource. by First-person essay by Sue Kerr READ MORE STORIES Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , community , environment , health , history , industry , Pittsburgh , pollution , South Hills