Posted in Daily report , posts August 13, 2015 by PublicSource contributor August 13, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Harrisburg: Kane speaks out about charges for first time State Attorney General Kathleen Kane says she is innocent of the criminal charges against her. She says she is the victim of a ploy by state officials to hide pornographic and racially and religiously insensitive emails that they shared between 2008 and 2012. She gave no signs of stepping down from her position. Pittsburgh: Former teacher’s sex scandal A judge threw out motions to dismiss the sex assault case against former Plum High School teacher Jason Cooper. Cooper is accused of having sex with a student who while 18, could not legally consent to sex with a teacher under state law. Pittsburgh: Building owners suing city over guard training The Building Owners and Managers Association is saying that the city ordinance mandating the training of security guards is illegal . The ordinance states that employers have to pay for their security guards to be trained in the use of force, terrorism detection and emergency response. Pittsburgh: Kraft Heinz Co. cuts jobs The newly-formed condiment monolith is cutting 2,500 jobs in the U.S. and Canada. A company spokesman said that despite the merger, Heinz will still be a prominent icon in Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh: Man charged with harassing FBI agent A Pittsburgh man has been charged with stalking and harassing a federal agent by posting a fake sex ad on Craigslist with the agent’s contact information. The agent, identified as T.P., investigated Banks in 2003 on accounts that he was selling pirated software. Statewide: Still no state budget Gov. Tom Wolf criticized the GOP budget plan that he vetoed in June because it “really didn’t do anything for Pennsylvania.” The state has not had a budget in seven weeks. Mt. Lebanon: Commissioners entertain using sharpshooters for deer problem Area officials announced that in September, they may consider contracting sharpshooters to help manage the deer population. This follows the community’s deer culling program that ended in March. Harrisburg: School districts assigned junk bond status Moody’s Investors Service released a report saying that Pennsylvania has some of the most financially distressed school districts in the country. Auditor General Eugene DePasquale said that stresses, like charter school tuition mandates, led to the ranking. Erie County: Report reveals spike in student obesity A 238-page health assessment showed that the percentage of overweight students in the county had more than doubled from the 2011-12 to 2012-13 academic year. The county Department of Health posted the data on Tuesday. NATIONAL Clinton hands over her private server Hillary Clinton gave authorities the private computer server that she used to send personal emails when she was secretary of state. She also handed over a thumb drive that had copies of her emails on it. Texas cop fired for killing black teenager Arlington cop Brad Miller was fired on Tuesday for “inappropriate judgement” after he shot and killed 19-year-old Christian Taylor over the weekend. Regardless, Taylor’s father, Adrian, said he wasn’t comforted by the officer’s dismissal. Trump pro-Planned Parenthood Donald Trump told Fox correspondent Sean Hannity that he supports Planned Parenthood. He says that he opposes abortion, but commends the health provider on its other services. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor State of emergency continues in Ferguson St. Louis County police say the town will remain under a state of emergency . No arrests have been made during the last two nights of nonviolent protests. IN OTHER NEWS Long-lost queen found Archaeologist Nicholas Reeves says that he might know where the tomb of Queen Nefertiti is. Her final resting place may be beyond two hidden doorways inside the tomb of King Tutankhamun. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.