Posted in Environment , posts This six-year-old got Obama to watch his short film about climate change by Natasha Khan March 25, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X “Are you paying attention?” “Have you seen it?” “Look closely…it’s changing,” said six-year-old Noah Gue, a cute blonde-haired, blue-eyed first grader from Montana, in a film he made about climate change. The three-minute film he produced with his parents was one of 15 finalists for this year’s White House Student Film Festival . Noah and his parents attended and met the president. Noah stares with his baby blues into the camera in his film “Through My Eyes” where he conveys how he’s seen climate change affect his mountain town, Bozeman. “It’s time for the world to see conservation through a kid’s eyes,” he says in the film. From a National Geographic article about Noah’s video: FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The child’s appeal comes as President Barack Obama sidesteps GOP opponents in his efforts to fight global warming. On [March 19] Obama signed an executive order that requires the federal government to slash its greenhouse gas emissions by 40 percent, from 2008 levels, and boost its share of electricity from renewable sources to 30 percent by 2025. “Glaciers are receding and soon could be gone forever,” he says in the film, a glacier looming in the background. “Some animals may go extinct in the next century,” he says. The film shows Noah trying to ski down a snowy hill and then hitting a dry path. “February in Montana at 9,000 feet,” he says. “What a shame.” Noah and his family are traveling around Montana taking photos to inspire conservation, he say. “My hope is that the pictures that we’re taking will inspire others to protect the environment,” Noah says at the end of his film. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org or 412-315-0261. Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan