ELECTION 2024 Democracy & Doubt Pittsburgh navigates trust and choice in the 2024 election season STORIES As Trump takes office on MLK Day, ‘we did it’ meets ‘we must fight back’ You survived 2024. Now vote one more time — for your must-follow news topics. Democrats retain 1-seat majority control of the Pennsylvania House Darkness or dawn? Pittsburgh responds to triumph of Trump, GOP Republican David McCormick flips pivotal Pennsylvania Senate seat, ousts Bob Casey Dems’ PA House majority hangs on Cambria County district, where votes are still being counted ‘Something great’ and ‘the world is ending’ echo in post-election din Trump made gains in much of Pennsylvania — but very little in Allegheny County Trump wins the White House in political comeback rooted in appeals to frustrated voters After the ads, rallies and voting, what are your thoughts on the historic 2024 election? Post-election jitters and ambitions set in as Pittsburgh region, state and country count votes Live election results: Pennsylvania votes for president, Congress, state offices Election Day 2024: From the polls to the warehouse, more energy than anxiety Trump doubts election integrity while Harris champions reproductive rights on election eve in Pittsburgh How votes are counted in Allegheny County The Glimpse: Glitter, grease and grit are defenses in a Freeport Road sign war Updated: Harrisburg power balance draws millions in ad spending to Allegheny County down-ballot races For trans people reliant on federal programs, election could change everything Spot Check: Ads in Mon Valley state Senate race allege guilt by association Polling shows Pennsylvania voters are divided on fracking Spot Check: Republican PAC ad ties Casey to sanctuary cities with little evidence How and where to return a mail-in ballot in Allegheny County As the TikTok generation registers to vote, schools take on misinformation Election guide 2024: Who’s on the ballot in the Pittsburgh region? Allegheny County voter guide 2024: Who’s on the ballot? Armstrong County voter guide 2024: Who’s on the ballot? Beaver County voter guide 2024: Who’s on the ballot? Butler County voter guide 2024: Who’s on the ballot? Fayette County voter guide 2024: Who’s on the ballot? Lawrence County voter guide 2024: Who’s on the ballot? Washington County voter guide 2024: Who’s on the ballot? Westmoreland County voter guide 2024: Who’s on the ballot? Spot Check: Democratic group revisits McCormick’s local business record College Dems energized, Republicans seek ‘safe spaces’ amid consequential election season Spot Check: Deluzio goes after Mercuri on abortion, including 2021 ‘heartbeat bill’ Contenders in Pennsylvania Senate race shy from risky climate, energy stances while courting voters Home rule vote could start next chapter for Wilkinsburg Spot Check: Well-funded AG race ad tries to tie candidate to ‘defund the police’ calls Who’s paying for all those political ads? Bloomberg, a Mellon, ‘dark money’ PACs and more Spot Check: Abortion ban ad, and counterpunch on gender-affirming care, loose with facts Trump and Harris, with divided labor records, grapple for PA’s union voters Here’s why our election coverage matters On prices, production and employment, campaigns offer wildly different takes. Here are the facts for the Pittsburgh area. Spot Check: Newcomer attacks state Senate candidate on House calendar, pay set by law and per diems Divided on abortion, inflation and immigration, Pittsburgh suburbs could swing 2024 presidential race Spot Check: Dark money ad blames Casey for inflation, but causes go way beyond the Senate, economists say Washington County violated voters’ rights by concealing mail-in ballot rejections, court rules Appalachia’s young voters could impact the 2024 election Pittsburgh-area Democratic delegates ages 20 to 76 confront elevated role, while Republicans retool for campaign vs. Harris Butler officials hope to maintain momentum despite Trump rally shooting, while regional voices largely mum From ‘relieved’ to ‘hopeless,’ readers wracked and apprehensive following Butler shooting The Republican convention is about 2024, but 2020 and Jan. 6 are still on minds of Pittsburgh-area delegates ‘No room for complacency’: Political experts discuss path forward after attempt to assassinate Trump Tell us how you feel after the attempt to assassinate Trump in Southwestern Pa. In wake of Trump rally shooting, his Southwestern Pa. supporters are shaken but ‘vibrant’ as elected leaders urge civility Photo essay: Canonsburg’s outsized Fourth of July parade sees tens of thousands celebrate the nation’s history, spirit Pa. Republicans are pushing mail-in voting for 2024, but Trump-fueled skepticism remains in the party In no-suspense presidential primaries, Allegheny County map shows weaknesses for both Trump and Biden Live primary results: Summer Lee nominated to serve second term in Congress Primary Day 2024: how to vote in Pennsylvania for nominees for president, Congress and state offices Young voters helped decide the 2020 election in Pa. Will they turn out for a Biden-Trump rematch? Democratic primary for Pittsburgh’s Congress seat flooded by money from afar, including conservative Yass Pa. House Republicans seek to move voter ID bill forward Push to cut 10s of thousands from Allegheny County voter rolls feeds fears Secretary sounds alarm on election leadership turnover in Pa. counties Who’s running in Allegheny County elections in 2024? Election 2024: What do you want to know?