Andi Whorehol performs among the crowd at the Be Gay Do Prom drag concert in Millvalle on April 14, 2023. (Photo by Amaya Lobato Rivas/PublicSource) Posted in GENDER & IDENTITY What’s a drag show like? A Millvale event had a prom vibe plus ‘overwhelming acceptance.’ Days after the anti-drag agenda reached Harrisburg, performers and their audience outside of Pittsburgh put their spin on a high school rite. by Amaya Lobato May 12, 2023 May 12, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X College students in prom dresses and suits and ties packed The Funhouse at Mr. Smalls in celebration of the Be Gay [Do Prom] drag concert in Millvale on April 14. Miss Demeanor, a sophomore acting major at Point Park University, is the host and creator of the Be Gay [Do Crime] drag concert series. This story is a part of Selves , a newsletter about gender and identity by PublicSource. Sign up today . The concert came just as a national push by conservative lawmakers to restrict drag reached Pennsylvania. Nine days earlier, state Rep. Aaron Bernstein, R-Lawrence and Butler counties, reached out to ask colleagues for support for a bill that would classify drag shows as “adult-oriented businesses,” thereby restricting where they can be held and who can attend. The show’s organizers were motivated in part by the desire to give young adults a place and time to feel a sense of community — something that had been constrained since early 2020. “Be Gay [Do Prom] was a fantastic opportunity to help recreate something I never got because of the COVID pandemic,” Demeanor said. According to drag performer Peter Pansy, Demeanor creates a welcoming, wholesome and safe environment for people under and over 21 to enjoy top-notch drag shows. Peter Pansy performed wearing extravagant, alien-like makeup that covered his face all the way to his chest. “The overwhelming acceptance, respect and excitement everyone has for when I step out with my paint and my presentation is incredibly euphoric,” he reflected. “It just makes me feel like the creature person I wanna be.” Dirt Dyke adjusts Andi Whorehol’s prom dress backstage at the Be Gay Do Prom drag concert in Millvalle on April 14, 2023. Drag queen Daisy Oopsy peeks out of the backstage curtains. (Slide 1) Peter Pansy applies his drag makeup backstage at the Be Gay Do Prom drag concert in Millvalle on April 14, 2023. (Slide 2) From left to right, Andi Whorehol, Jamie Lee Coitus, Daisy Oopsy, and Dirt Dyke pose for a photo backstage. (Slide 3) Lydia Kollins poses for a photo backstage. People in the crowd at the Be Gay Do Prom drag concert. Host Miss Demeanor judges the audience during a best dressed contest. People in the crowd. Peter Pansy performing. Amaya Lobato-Rivas was a PublicSource photojournalism intern from January to May. She is a student at the University of Pittsburgh, majoring in media and professional communication and minoring in film and media studies. She can be reached at aml299@pitt.edu . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: drag , Harrisburg , prom Amaya Lobato _migrated-1290339-amaya-lobato-rivas@example.com Amaya Lobato-Rivas is a senior at the University of Pittsburgh majoring in media and professional communication and minoring in film and media studies. Originally from Trujillo Alto, Puerto Rico, Amaya... More by Amaya Lobato