Posted in IN-DEPTH , PUBLIC SAFETY Race and justice by Alexandra Kanik December 6, 2014 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The deaths of unarmed black men at the hands of police has led to protests across the country, including in Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, and sparked a national conversation about the use of force by police. The protests began after grand juries in two cities declined to charge police officers with causing the deaths of Michael Brown, shot to death Aug. 9 in Ferguson, Mo., by officer Darren Wilson; and Eric Garner, who died July 17 in Staten Island after officer Daniel Pantaleo put him in a chokehold. The Department of Justice has launched investigations of both cases. The questions raised by those incidents are not new. Earlier this year, PublicSource and Pittsburgh City Paper created a timeline of local incidents involving allegations of inappropriate force and other misconduct by officers of the Pittsburgh Bureau of Police against citizens. The incidents were not lethal, and some lack the racial component of the Ferguson and Staten Island cases, but the questions they raise about police accountability are the same. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice