Posted in Equity Rally held in McKeesport to demand justice for Aaliyah Johnson and other Black trans people Aaliyah Johnson died in McKeesport in May. Her family and friends say there was never a proper investigation. by Juliette Rihl and Ryan Loew June 12, 2020 June 17, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Rashod Brown, 29, of East Liberty holds a candle alongside others outside of the McKeesport apartment building where Aaliyah Johnson lived. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) On Friday, a crowd held candles outside of the apartment building in McKeesport where Aaliyah Johnson lived. They were there to honor her life — and demand a proper investigation of her death. Johnson, a transgender Black woman, died on May 26 after falling from her window in Midtown Plaza Apartments. She was in her early 30s. Her death was ruled a suicide, but friends and family say there wasn’t an adequate investigation and demanded answers. “Her death is not gonna be in vain,” co-organizer Dena Stanley told PublicSource. “We’re going to get the justice we deserve.” Stanley is the founder of activist organization TransYOUniting and a close friend of Johnson. Johnson was a hairstylist, entertainer and commentator for the ballroom scene , an LGBTQ subculture started by Black and brown LGBTQ people. The Allegheny County police are investigating her death. On June 15, the department issued a statement providing details of its investigation of Johnson’s death, which the medical examiner determined to be a suicide. In the statement, Superintendent Coleman McDonough said that “detectives can say conclusively that she was alone” at the time of her death, based on security video from the scene. Over 200 people joined the two-hour march and candlelight vigil that looped around downtown McKeesport, stopping at police headquarters, the apartment where Johnson lived and the intersection of Walnut Street and Sixth Avenue. Arialynn Copeland (center), a friend of Aaliyah Johnson, speaks to rally-goers outside the McKeesport Public Safety Building on Friday alongside event co-organizer Dena Stanley. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Rally-goers gather outside the McKeesport Public Safety Building on Friday. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) “I need some answers. Her family needs some answers,” said Johnson’s mother, Tonya Reed, while standing in front of the McKeesport Public Safety Building where the police are headquartered. “My child will not be pushed under nobody’s rug.” “Black trans lives matter. Black queer lives matter. And we’re here to make sure she gets justice. Period,” said Terrance McGeorge, event co-organizer and a close friend of Johnson. Black transgender women are at a high risk of fatal violence. In 2019, over 25 transgender or gender-nonconforming people were killed, most of them Black transgender women, according to national LGBTQ civil rights organization Human Rights Campaign . Several friends and acquaintances shared stories and sentiments about Johnson’s life. “She was one of the best this city ever had to offer,” said Max Ryan, 32, who said he’d been friends with Johnson for almost 20 years. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Terrance McGeorge, rally co-organizer and a close friend of Aaliyah Johnson, speaks to a crowd of rally-goers outside the apartment building in McKeesport where Aaliyah Johnson lived. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Over 200 people joined in a two-hour march and candlelight vigil that looped around downtown McKeesport on Friday to demand justice for Aaliyah Johnson and other Black trans people. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) “Aaliyah was someone who showed me what love was,” said childhood friend of Johnson Tinky Younger. While David Brown only met Johnson one time, he said she made an impression on him. “We have the opportunity to learn from moments like this. To move forward from moments like this. To open our arms from moments like this,” he told the crowd. “Dare to love somebody. Dare to believe in somebody… because I want somebody else to saunter the way that she did.” Update (6/17/2020): This story was updated to include information on the investigation of Johnson’s death from the Allegheny County police. Juliette Rihl is a reporter for PublicSource. She can be reached at juliette@publicsource.org or on Twitter at @julietterihl. Ryan Loew is PublicSource’s visual storyteller/producer. He can be reached at ryan@publicsource.org and on Twitter at @RyanLoew. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram Juliette Rihl juliette@publicsource.org Juliette Rihl reports on criminal justice, public safety and mental health for PublicSource. Her 2020 series on how court debt impacts low-income Allegheny County residents prompted the county to join... More by Juliette Rihl Ryan Loew ryan@publicsource.org x Ryan is a PublicSource visual producer/storyteller. He joined PublicSource after being a freelance producer of news features and documentary stories in the Pittsburgh region and beyond. His work appeared... More by Ryan Loew