Posted in BREAKING NEWS Pittsburgh’s push for rental registration nixed by appeals court The Gainey administration vows to take its bid to impose fees and inspections on landlords to the state Supreme Court following loss in 15-year-old push. by Eric Jankiewicz March 17, 2023 March 21, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The City of Pittsburgh's efforts to register and inspect all rental housing were dealt a blow in a Commonwealth Court decision on March 17, 2023. The apartments and homes of Central Oakland as seen from the Schenley Bridge, on Wednesday, July 20, 2022. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/Public Source) A higher court ruling Friday found the city reached too far in its  requirement that rental property owners register and have their units inspected. In this decision impacting property owners across Pittsburgh, the Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania found the city government doesn’t have authority to require registration and inspections of rental housing. Mayor Ed Gainey said the city plans to appeal the case to the state Supreme Court. The case is a clash of laws dating back to an ordinance passed by Pittsburgh City Council in 2015. The measure deemed no rental unit to be leased, rented or occupied without the owner first obtaining a permit from the city. The annual fee for rental permits ranged from $45 to $65 depending on the number of units. Violations of the ordinance would have resulted in fines of $500 per unit per month. City lawmakers have passed, over 15 years, three separate rental registration ordinances, including a 2021 bill. None have been implemented. A group of landlords working through the Landlord Service Bureau, Realtors Association of Metropolitan Pittsburgh and Apartment Association of Metropolitan Pittsburgh brought a legal action against the city. They argued the ordinance was “void, and unconstitutional.” The groups also cited the state Home Rule Charter and Optional Plans Law, arguing that the rental registration ordinance was a regulation of its business, and a home rule municipality lacks power to do so under the law. The court wrote that its reversal came down less so to the existence of a rental ordinance but to the implementation of it. The ruling noted the problem came with the attendant responsibilities placed on landlords — things like having to attend a landlord academy, the use of an online database and following “best practices.” In court filings, the City argued that the Rental Ordinance is authorized by its broad police power to protect the health and safety of rental housing residents. The court found the city had not identified a legal justification that authorized the city’s “wide-ranging regulation of the residential landlord business.” Gainey said in a press release that his administration was “deeply disappointed” in Friday’s decision. “Pittsburgh is a majority renter city and everyone who lives here deserves protection and the knowledge that their rented home meets basic standards of living,” he said in a statement and called the 2015 ordinance “common sense legislation.” He said that the city plans to appeal to the State Supreme Court. Since 2008, the city has attempted to enact registration and inspections of its rental housing. In 2009, the city and real estate interests agreed to try to negotiate the terms of a program, but they never reached agreement. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Former Mayor Bill Peduto’s administration and Pittsburgh City Council again began to weigh rental registration in 2014, culminating in the passage of the 2015 ordinance and the ongoing litigation. Some Pennsylvania cities have long had rental registration programs. In 2021, PublicSource and WESA detailed Allentown’s two-decade-old rental registration regime. Eric Jankiewicz is PublicSource’s economic development reporter, and can be reached at ericj@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ericjankiewicz . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: apartment rentals , apartments , commonwealth court , Gainey administration , leadstorynoshow , Pittsburgh , state court , supreme court , trial court Eric Jankiewicz ericj@publicsource.org Eric Jankiewicz is a reporter focused on housing and economic development for PublicSource. A native New Yorker, Eric moved to Pittsburgh in 2017 and has since fallen in love with his adopted city, even... More by Eric Jankiewicz