Posted in Community storytelling Local news is dead? Not in Pittsburgh. More than 30 outlets bring you the latest Southwestern Pennsylvania’s media ecosystem is diverse and deep. Here’s how to find local journalism that matters to you. by Aavin Mangalmurti December 23, 2022 February 28, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Gone are the days when you can rely on one or two news outlets to bring you everything from weather to investigations. But over recent years, dozens of news providers with different approaches have emerged and are sharing stories of the Pittsburgh area. The downside: You have to do some homework. Social media platforms and their algorithms only go so far in making sure you see relevant news and information. In fact, what you see is controlled by their algorithms and influenced by the hearts, likes, retweets and shares of your social media connections. “Fake news,” misinformation and negative news run rampant on social media, and open users up to being less aware and less knowledgeable about current events. To help alleviate the challenge of navigating authentic, local news that isn’t curated by Big Tech, PublicSource has compiled this service guide of local media outlets with links and information about each. Many of these organizations, including PublicSource , have regular email newsletters that can help you to be aware of their stories. If you think we’ve missed a credible journalistic outlet, please email info@publicsource.org . 90.5 WESA 90.5 WESA is Pittsburgh’s NPR station and broadcasts to most of Southwestern Pennsylvania. The station covers an array of city news and its morning news show, The Confluence, often features interviews with community leaders and area journalists. The station is operated by the Pittsburgh Community Broadcasting Corporation, a not-for-profit entity. The Allegheny Front The Allegheny Front is a website and weekly radio program airing on WESA (at 7:30 p.m. Fridays and 3 p.m. Saturdays) and other regional radio stations that centers on environmental issues throughout Western Pennsylvania. The Allegheny Front falls under the umbrella of the Pittsburgh Community Broadcasting Corporation. The Almanac The Almanac covers news from suburbs south of Pittsburgh, including Bethel Park, Mt. Lebanon, Peters, South Fayette and Upper St. Clair. Ambridge Connection Ambridge Connection is a public Facebook news page that serves the Ohio Valley communities of Ambridge, Baden, Economy, Harmony Township and South Heights. The page brings awareness to local news, events, real estate, activities and athletics. Black Pittsburgh Black Pittsburgh is a free news website centered on the African American experience in Pittsburgh. The outlet is owned by 1Hood Media. Black Pittsburgh maintains several media series, including This Week in White Supremacy and What Black Pittsburgh Needs to Know. The Bulletin The Bulletin is the free monthly newspaper for Bloomfield, Garfield, Friendship and environs. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The Citizen The Citizen, which recently went from print to online-only, is an independent outlet covering Avalon, Bellevue, Ben Avon, Ben Avon Heights, Emsworth, Kilbuck and Ohio Township. City Cast Pittsburgh City Cast Pittsburgh produces a podcast and newsletter that aim to create a connection between listeners and their communities through stories in 10- to 30-minute form. The podcast covers a variety of topics and is a part of a growing network of City Cast streams nationwide, with outlets in other major cities such as Washington, Chicago and Houston. Duquesne Duke The Duquesne Duke is Duquesne University’s student-run online and print newspaper. The Duke publishes its print edition weekly, with campus news, arts and university sports. h magazine h is published by The Heinz Endowments*, and focuses on efforts to advance Southwestern Pennsylvania’s creative, educational, social, economic and environmental sustainability. The Homepage The Homepage is the hyperlocal, monthly newspaper for Greater Hazelwood, including Greenfield, The Run and New Homestead. The Incline The Incline produces a newsletter that delivers stories in short form, curates news by other outlets and provides a list of events happening in Pittsburgh during the week, including performances, classes and other events. KDKA KDKA, also known as Channel 2, is the regional affiliate of CBS and provides breaking news and live commentary on current events. The channel covers a variety of topics including politics, health and entertainment. Kidsburgh A family-focused digital publication, Kidsburgh provides news and other content on resources for children as well as information and advice on child development and raising families in the region. It also compiles a calendar of kid-friendly events. Mon Valley Independent The Mon Valley Independent is a print and digital newspaper that serves the Middle Monongahela Valley, including the communities of Charleroi, Donora, Monessen and Monogahala. The Independent, which publishes every day except Sunday and is available by subscription only, includes news, sports, obituaries, classifieds and local business guides. New Pittsburgh Courier The New Pittsburgh Courier is a free print and online newspaper centered on issues surrounding African Americans in Pittsburgh. The publication is operated by media conglomerate Real Times Media, which also owns the Chicago Defender, the Michigan Chronicle and the Atlanta Daily World. NEXTpittsburgh NEXTpittsburgh is a news website that covers innovation and the people driving it throughout the city and region. It features a weekly offering by longtime columnist Tony Norman, a forthcoming podcast with Norman and Natalie Bencivenga and publishes guides to local events and neighborhoods. The Northside Chronicle The Northside Chronicle is the newspaper for North Side communities. The paper publishes monthly and is available by subscription or for free at a newspaper box. The Pitt News The Pitt News is the free, student-run newspaper of the University of Pittsburgh Main Campus. The outlet publishes in print on Wednesdays. The Pitt news writes articles relevant to the Pitt community, with topic focuses including administration, campus life and university sports. Pittsburgh Business Times The Pittsburgh Business Times is a subscription-based publication online and in print focused on business and the economy in the city. The Pittsburgh Catholic Online-only source of Catholic news published by the Diocese of Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh City Paper Pittsburgh City Paper is a daily online publication that covers news, food, the arts and local events, plus columns covering topics such as astrology and Pittsburgh eccentricities. The City Paper distributes free print editions every Wednesday. Pittsburgh Independent The Pittsburgh Independent, which began publishing in April 2022, is a news site that writes about issues and innovation throughout the region. Pittsburgh Jewish Chronicle The Pittsburgh Jewish Chronicle is a free online and print newspaper centering on the Greater Pittsburgh Jewish community. Published in print every Friday, the Chronicle covers local, national and global news and maintains a calendar of local events and celebrations. The paper is affiliated with the Times of Israel and other Jewish publications nationwide. Pittsburgh Magazine Pittsburgh Magazine is a monthly subscription-only publication and free website that covers local events and stories. The magazine publishes several other periodicals, including a quarterly magazine focused on homes and an annual publication centered on giving. Pittsburgh Latino Magazine Pittsburgh Latino Magazine is a free English and Spanish news website sharing stories important to the greater Pittsburgh Latino community. The publication covers a wide range of topics including business, community, culture, food, health and immigration. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette is a print and digital newspaper with coverage of the city and region alongside state and national news. The Post-Gazette is printed on Thursdays and Sundays, plus has a daily, partially paywall-protected e-edition and website. Pittsburgh Quarterly Printed and online periodical featuring news, analysis, business, lifestyle and other content, plus photo essays and data. Pittsburgh Union Progress The Pittsburgh Union Progress is the free digital newspaper of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette’s striking Newspaper Guild members. The journalists cover strike news and community news and plan to cease operations following the resolution of their ongoing labor dispute. Pittsburgh Urban Media Pittsburgh Urban Media is a news website serving African Americans in Western Pennsylvania. The publication aims to provide opportunities to disenfranchised communities. Point Park Globe The Point Park Globe is the student-run publication of Point Park University. The outlet publishes free weekly print editions during the school year with articles covering campus news, events and sports. Postindustrial Postindustrial is a multimedia publication focusing on issues affecting Appalachia and the Rust Belt. Topics covered include postindustrial cities, the future of work, sustainability and veterans. Postindustrial publishes articles online for free, and a quarterly magazine is available for monthly subscribers. Print Print is a hyper-local newspaper focusing on Squirrel Hill, Shadyside, East Liberty, Point Breeze and Homewood. It is available in print only, at local businesses or by subscription. PublicSource PublicSource is an online, nonprofit news organization serving the Pittsburgh region. Its mission is to inspire critical thinking and bold ideas through journalism based on facts, diverse voices and the pursuit of transparency. PublicSource’s coverage areas include local government, economic development, health, the environment, K-12 education and higher education, equity and identity issues. Qburgh Qburgh is an online source for news and resources for the LGBTQ community in Western Pennsylvania. The site also maintains a community calendar, an archive of queer publications and photographs and a community directory. Soul Pitt Media Soul Pitt is a subscription-based media company that informs the Western Pennsylvania African American community about news, stories and performances. Soul Pitt publishes a quarterly magazine and streams a health and business podcast. South Pittsburgh Reporter The South Pittsburgh Reporter is a family-owned newspaper covering the city’s southern neighborhoods, including Allentown, Arlington, Beltzhoover, Bon Air, Carrick, Knoxville, Mount Washington, the South Side Flats and the South Side Slopes, plus Mount Oliver. Talk Magazine Talk Magazine is a statewide quarterly publication that writes stories centering around the African American and Latino communities in Pennsylvania. Each of the four yearly issues focuses on a different theme: Black History, college, business and wellness. Issues are available free online or by subscription to your mailbox. Technical.ly Technical.ly covers innovation, entrepreneurship and technology in several cities, including Pittsburgh. The Tartan The Tartan and associated Tartan Online are the free print and digital publications of Carnegie Mellon University. The student-run paper covers topics relevant to campus life, including articles about science and technology. The Tribune-Review and TribLIVE Trib Total Media is the umbrella media company that operates the Tribune-Review and other local weekly and monthly periodicals throughout portions of Allegheny, Westmoreland, Armstrong and Butler counties. Stories are available for free online, though a subscription is needed to get print and digital versions of stories in traditional newspaper formatting. The Tube City Almanac The Tube City Almanac is a nonprofit, online news source focused on McKeesport, White Oak, Duquesne, North Versailles and other Mon Valley-area communities. University Times University Times is the University of Pittsburgh’s staff-run publication covering campus news and issues of interest to the Pitt community. The Valley Mirror The Valley Mirror is a weekly newspaper published on Thursdays serving the Steel Valley and Woodland Hills school districts, West Mifflin, Lincoln Place and environs. Copies are available in local gas stations and convenience stores or by subscription. WPXI-TV WPXI, also known as Channel 11, is the Pittsburgh NBC affiliate. The channel offers morning and nightly coverage including breaking news, sports and event coverage and live commentary. WQED WQED, also known as Channel 13, is the PBS member TV station in Pittsburgh. The station is known for its educational programming for children, airing both local and non-local documentaries and its well-known producer Rick Sebak. WTAE WTAE, otherwise known as Pittsburgh Action News 4, is the Pittsburgh affiliate of ABC owned by Hearst Television. The outlet broadcasts live coverage of local events in the morning and evening. YaJagoff! Media Yajagoff! Media operates the Jagoff Blawg, the Yajagoff Podcast and other free Pittsburgh-centered publications. All explore facets of Pittsburgh life, including events, eats and local causes. *PublicSource receives funding from The Heinz Endowments. Aavin Mangalmurti is an editorial intern with PublicSource and can be reached via info@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: journalism , Pittsburgh , social media