Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan December 11, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Federal transportation bill includes crude oil safety measures Pushed by lawmakers in states with heavy crude-by-rail traffic, the measures require the U.S. Department of Homeland Security to give real-time information about crude oil shipments to state and local first responders; direct federal transportation regulators to speed up rules requiring railroads to submit plans on how they’ll respond to worst-case scenario spills; and fund a new study to look at how much insurance railroads should carry. Railroads fought safety rules after a pair of 2012 train crashes killed two people Two 2012 train accidents linked to worn rails prompted U.S. transportation officials to seek rules requiring standards for replacing worn-down rails. The Associated Press has found that major resistance from the railroad industry “killed that bid.” Now, following a fiery oil train crash in West Virginia earlier this year, federal railroad officials are renewing their efforts to establish rules for worn rails and say that they won’t let the railroad industry tamper their efforts. Major crude hauler fined in Washington state for not reporting spills BNSF Railway agreed to pay Washington state $71,000 in fines after the railroad company failed to report to state officials more than a dozen releases of hazardous materials, including crude oil, between Nov. 1, 2014, and Feb. 24, 2015. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting New York rail inspectors find defects New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced that state and federal railroads inspectors found more than 40 rail car and track defects across the state on crude-by-rail routes. The inspection blitzes are part of a statewide effort that targets inspections on oil train routes. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org or 412-315-0261. Follow her on Twitter @khantasha . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan