Posted in DATA , Local Government , SALARIES DATA Find out how much Allegheny County paid its staff in 2017. Take our quiz. by J. Dale Shoemaker and Natasha Khan April 3, 2018 April 10, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X While you may be spending a third of your budget on housing or paying off debt, Allegheny County spends about a third of its budget on employee salaries. In 2017, 35 percent of the county’s operating budget went to paychecks. That line item, however, did not include health insurance or other benefits workers receive. PublicSource publishes data on the employee salaries from Allegheny County, the City of Pittsburgh and the state of Pennsylvania each year because we think residents should see how their tax dollars are spent. We’ve been reporting on salaries since 2014. When looking at the county data, some stories stand out: Employees who worked in public safety-related fields tend to earn the most overtime because those departments have heavy workloads and are often understaffed. But other stories aren’t as obvious. For example, overtime among county jail employees spiked by $2 million. That might be explained by the change in staffing; the jail lost about 43 employees between 2016 and 2017. This year, we’re breaking down the salaries data with a twist: It’s all in the form of a quiz for a fun way to learn how your tax dollars are spent. We’re also making the full datasets available, so you can take some time to explore the numbers on your own. Let us know if you have any questions. *Note: Quiz answers will appear above the choices as you click. Also note that we were listening to a lot of ‘90s and early 2000s music when building this quiz, so you’ll see some references to that era! This data story was fact-checked by Eric Holmberg. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan