Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts In less than 10 years, North American leaders expect 50 percent of our energy to be clean by PublicSource contributor June 29, 2016 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Non-renewable fossil fuels generated 67 percent of the United States’ 4 trillion kilowatt hours of electrical energy last year. By 2025, though, North American leaders say clean, renewable energy will be the new standard. Today, President Barack Obama meets with Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and Mexico President Enrique Pena Nieto in Ottawa for the North American Leaders’ Summit. The summit will largely focus on clean energy and combatting climate change, primarily through a joint pledge to achieve 50 percent clean power generation across North America by 2025, according to a White House statement on Monday: We will accomplish this goal through clean energy development and deployment, clean energy innovation and energy efficiency. Building from ongoing efforts by our respective energy ministers through the North American Energy Ministerial Memorandum Concerning Climate Change and Energy Collaboration, a range of initiatives will support this goal. Currently, U.S. electricity generation mostly falls on coal and natural gas extraction, which each contribute 33 percent to total energy share, according to data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration [EIA]. At a state level, Pennsylvania embodies this reliance on nonrenewable energy. As of 2013, Pennsylvania was the fourth most productive state in coal production . In 2014, the state ranked second in natural gas extraction, largely due to deposits from the Marcellus Shale. While Pennsylvania is a key producer of non-renewable energy, the state has made strides in clean nuclear power — in 2014, it ranked second in the nation in electricity generation from nuclear power. Still, renewable energy accounted for just 4 percent of Pennsylvania’s net electricity generation. Pennsylvania’s Alternative Energy Portfolio Standards require 18 percent of electricity sold by 2021 to come from approved renewable or alternative sources, including at least 0.5 percent solar photovoltaic power, according to the EIA. (See PublicSource’s story on solar energy in Pennsylvania.) This state standard highlights that North American leaders are setting an aggressive goal — there is still a clear reliance on fossil fuels in both the United States and Canada. White House Senior Adviser Brian Deese said in a statement that reducing power plant emissions through the Clean Power Plan is essential to meeting the 50 percent goal. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Earlier this year, though, the Supreme Court blocked the Environmental Protection Agency from enforcing the plan . At the summit, President Pena Nieto will also officially announce his decision to align with the United States and Canada in reducing methane emissions — the second-most prevalent greenhouse gas in the climate — by 40 to 45 percent by 2025. Canada leads the race to reliance on clean energy, at 81 percent, mostly through hydroelectric power . The United States follows behind at 33 percent — primarily through usage of nuclear energy — and Mexico trails at 18 percent. Reach Courtney Linder at clinder@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @CNL_13 . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy , Marcellus Shale