Posted in FIRST PERSON A childhood sexual assault persists in this Pittsburgh woman’s mind, magnified by a post-Roe world by First-person essay by Stephanie Graf July 8, 2022 September 7, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Illustration by Andrea Shockling/PublicSource) Compelling personal stories told by the people living them. Editor’s note: This poem contains references to sexual assault and trauma. I wrote this poem to help myself process the grief and anger I was feeling at the reversal of Roe v. Wade . I hope that having the courage to share it will inspire others to share their stories as well. Together, we can humanize those who are impacted by having lost their reproductive freedoms and protect those whose rights are currently on the line here in Pennsylvania. Our stories matter and so do our futures. American Monsters I was taken without permission, I was young, and shamed, and scared. I’d close my eyes and try to dream, But the Monster was always there. I prepared a plan alone in my room. I researched where I could go. In case I was pregnant at the age of sixteen, By someone who I had told “No.” The weeks went by and my cycle began, Hallelujah! My secret stays mine! I can keep it forever and eat the shame, The Monster should fade with time. Twenty years passed & the Monster still lives, He stuck for decades in my mind. But now it’s time to let my secret out, For women’s rights are on the line. In 2001, I had a plan, One that would keep my future intact. In 2022, the Monster has won, I want our freedom back! Maybe I’d be given an exception? After all, it was an assault. Of course, that’s if they believed me, They’d probably say it’s my fault. America, I want to love you, But you have to love me in return! So for now I’ll have two Monsters, Because Roe has been overturned. —Poem by Stephanie Graf, a Pittsburgh resident and mother. If you want to reach Stephanie, please email firstperson@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: gender , identity , leadstorynoshow , sexual assault , women