Posted in Heroin: Riding the Rush , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Heroin barely more expensive than cigarettes by Jeffrey Benzing August 31, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Heroin is cheap. It’s plentiful. And, it’s deadly. In follow up to the recent staggering overdose count in Washington County, the Washington Post compared the cost of a single stamp bag to a pack of cigarettes , noting how a flooded market keeps heroin costs low. In Southwestern Pennsylvania, a pack of cigarettes is slightly less expensive (at somewhere between $6 and $7). Heroin is $8, Rick Gluth, supervising detective in Washington County told the Post. Sixteen residents there overdosed within 24 hours earlier this month. In a two-day period, the total was 25. Three overdoses were fatal. In both Baltimore and New York City, heroin is indeed cheaper than a pack of cigarettes, the Post said, citing a fairly informal cigarette cost survey by The Awl. The Drug Enforcement Agency’s (DEA) Joseph Moses told the Post that drug prices can vary, but bountiful supplies from Mexico mean it will be available and far cheaper than painkillers that many use before turning to heroin. According to the Post : [I]n the last few years price has largely been determined by concerted action on the part of Mexican drug cartels, which previously controlled a smaller part of the U.S. heroin market, generally in the west, Moses said. Knowing that opiate pills such as Oxycontin have become too expensive on the street, the cartels did two things: they dramatically increased production and they developed networks to move it east of the Mississippi, he said. Attempts by the DEA to seize more heroin coming from Mexico has not raised the cost, Moses told the Post. Painkillers, which are often legally prescribed for legitimate pain, can now be difficult to find since the government began a crackdown on inappropriate distribution by doctors. But addictions didn’t disappear, and many users have simply shifted their habit to the drug that’s available. Meanwhile, the overdose antidote Naloxone can keep a drug user from dying if administered quickly enough. But many barriers, including high cost, mean drug users and their families often don’t have access when needed. While the drug has existed for decades, it wasn’t until late last year that the state legislature took action to make Naloxone easier to find. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Allegheny County has a standing order for Naloxone, meaning it is available to anyone who wants it. As the Pittsburgh City Paper reported last week, only 14 pharmacies are participating. Reach Jeffrey Benzing at 412-315-0265 or at jbenzing@publicsource.org. Follow him on Twitter @jabenzing. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Drug abuse and rehabilitation