Posted in Daily report , posts July 1, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 1, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Harrisburg: Gov. Tom Wolf vetoes the budget The whole thing. Republicans expected a line-item veto that would continue discussion on certain items, but Gov. Wolf considered it unbalanced and incapable of addressing Pennsylvanians’ problems. Harrisburg: Wine with your groceries A liquor privatization bill passed the Senate on Tuesday. A vote by the House was expected later in the day. If passed and not vetoed by the governor, it would phase out state stores and allow convenience and grocery stores to carry wine and liquor on top of beer. Harrisburg: Pension reform for future state employees On Tuesday, a pension reform bill passed through the House and was sent to the Senate. The bill takes the formula-based retirement benefits system used by current state and public employees and converts it to a 401(k). Pittsburgh: Feeding kids during the summer Eighty percent of children in Pittsburgh area schools receive free or reduced breakfasts and lunches. Legislation is currently in the works that would offer additional summer food opportunities to children, as well as broaden eligibility to more kids. Pittsburgh: New Monroeville Mall security measures After a series of violent crimes at the mall, the owners decided to install state-of-the-art security cameras that will surveil both the interior and exterior of the building. The feeds will be available both on and off-site. Washington County: Heroin overdoses Since Thursday, Washington County reported three heroin overdoses . There have now been eight incidents in three weeks. Philadelphia: Woman stole $24,000 from FEMA Dearn Briggs-Feliciano pleaded guilty to charges of forgery, identity theft and theft by deception when she fraudulently received aid from the Federal Emergency Management Agency after Hurricane Irene in 2011. She paid back $10,000 already and now owes the remainder to FEMA as restitution. NATIONAL Chris Christie joins the race New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie announced his bid for the White House on Tuesday. There are now 14 people running for the Republication nomination. Misty Copeland makes history On Tuesday, she was promoted to principal dancer at the American Ballet Theater, becoming the first black person to make the position in the company’s history. Shootings by police in 2015 This dataset shows that at least 461 people have been killed by police so far this year, with 62 in the last 30 days. WORLD Greece poised to default Greece asked for a bailout Tuesday, but was denied . On Sunday, people will be asked to vote on a referendum. Based on a “yes” or “no” outcome, Greece may leave the eurozone, the conglomeration of countries that use the euro currency. If Greece does leave, there could be be immense worldwide effects . IN OTHER NEWS If you have an iPhone, try asking Siri this question (or tell her you’re drunk) What is zero divided by zero? FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.