Posted in NEWS PARTNERS Plans to redevelop Downtown YWCA building in jeopardy after lawsuit Plans recently hyped by Gov. Shapiro to turn the former club in Downtown Pittsburgh into apartments have been thrown into question by the Michigan-based owner’s mortgage default. by Abigail Hakas June 11, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The former YWCA building in Downtown Pittsburgh has sat vacant since a Michigan-based developer bought it in 2022 with plans to convert it into apartments. (Photo by Caleb McCartney/Next Generation Newsroom) It has all the hallmarks of a project abandoned: insulation torn out, strewn across the floor alongside construction materials. A lone coffee cup sits atop a stack of boards, left for months. The former YWCA of Greater Pittsburgh building on Wood Street in Downtown still bears signs for what was once the headquarters, purchased for $4 million by Michigan-based City Club Apartments in 2022 for a promised apartment renovation. But a federally appointed receiver could seek a new buyer, with the permission of mortgage holder Union Labor Life Insurance Co. Union Labor sued City Club in February, and a judge ruled in early May that the owner owes more than $3.8 million plus interest for defaulting on the mortgage. Now, it’s not clear what’s next for the prominent building, which city, state and local officials touted in October as part of a $600 million Downtown revitalization . The owner promised a renovation to include nearly 300 apartment units with restaurant and retail space. “The city is aware of the recent legal developments involving City Club Apartments and is closely monitoring the situation,” said Olga George, press secretary for Mayor Ed Gainey. “While these circumstances have understandably raised questions, it’s important to emphasize that the city remains committed to the revitalization of Downtown and continues to view the YWCA project as a vital part of that vision.” Martin Perry, senior managing director for real estate company Newmark, was appointed as a receiver to take over the property. A court-appointed receiver is a third party tasked with managing the property. The company declined to comment, and Perry did not respond to requests seeking comment. City Club Apartments, headed by CEO Jonathan Holtzman, lined up millions in public funding to redevelop the YWCA into a 24-story apartment building, though none of that funding was distributed. The company has developed apartments throughout the country, and the website says Holtzman is a third-generation developer. As of Friday, there was no phone listed for his company, and no attorney was listed in court documents. Union Labor Life Insurance Co. and its attorney Robert Dauer of Meyer, Unkovic & Scott did not respond to requests for comment. City Club Apartments failed to respond to the complaint, one of at least five brought against the company in cases across the country. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Leaders say they are still open to throwing public dollars behind a development for the space. It housed the Y’s headquarters for nearly 60 years. Mandarin Gourmet restaurant and Point Park University’s Center for Media Innovation were located on the first floor of the four-story building. The former YWCA building on Smithfield Street. (Photo by Caleb McCartney/Next Generation Newsroom) The Urban Redevelopment Authority of Pittsburgh authorized up to $3.5 million for the project in November but did not close on financing. “We are still interested in supporting a residential development at that site,” said Dana Bohince, URA communications manager. The renovation was a part of the larger $600 million Downtown revitalization that would, among other things, preserve or create 1,000 residential units . Almost a third of those would come from the YWCA renovation. The state awarded $5.5 million in grants through the Redevelopment Assistance Capital Program under Gov. Josh Shapiro and Gov. Tom Wolf. RACP is a reimbursement-based grant program, so funding is only spent if a project begins. “DCED is aware of the recent challenges facing the development of the City Club Apartments and we are continuing to work with our partners across all sectors to ensure the successful redevelopment of downtown Pittsburgh,” said Justin Backover, press secretary for the state Department of Community & Economic Development. Councilor Daniel Lavelle, who represents parts of Downtown including where the former YWCA building is located, did not respond to requests for comment. Abigail Hakas is a reporter for Next Generation Newsroom, part of the Center for Media Innovation at Point Park University. Reach her at abigail.hakas@pointpark.edu . Caleb McCartney is a Pittsburgh-based freelance photographer and a recent graduate of Point Park University. Find his work here . NGN is a regional news service that focuses on government and enterprise reporting in southwestern Pennsylvania. Find out more information on foundation and corporate funders here . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI