Posted in Equity , HEALTH , On the beat , posts Scarce hospice info leaves dying patients vulnerable by Alexandra Kanik October 27, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X With little public information available on hospice companies, picking the right provider can  be a matter of chance — and the results can be devastating if the company doesn’t deliver. One Pittsburgh-area family had a horror story, according to the Washington Post , and is suing the provider for failing to deliver on its promises. According to the Post: The hospice “came in and promised the world,” said Janice Holan, whose husband, a lung cancer patient, died at home under the care of a Pittsburgh-area hospice. “And when it really mattered, they delivered nothing.” Robert Holan was choking and in pain the night before his death, the story said. But a nurse from Horizons Hospice found that the medicine he needed wasn’t there. The nurse tried to reach the hospice doctor who was “not to be bothered,” according to Janice Holan, who is also a nurse. That doctor, Oliver Herndon, pleaded guilty in May 2012 in federal court to insurance fraud and drug trafficking. Authorities considered him the largest illicit source of the painkillers oxycodone and oxymorphone in Western Pennsylvania, according to the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review . Janice Holan told the Post that the hospice company was recommended by her husband’s doctor. She got assurances from a sales representative that the company would provide proper care. The Holans were at a disadvantage because the federal government publishes no data on hospice quality. While a 2010 law requires that information on hospice companies be made available, it won’t be ready until 2017, according to the story. According to the Post: The absence of information forces families to speculate and hope for the best — to roll the dice — when choosing medical care for a loved one facing death. It also allows hospices that offer poor service to escape detection, while the care at better hospices goes unrecognized. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Some hospice companies offer excellent care, the story notes. But others do not. One reason for bad care is that Medicare gives companies roughly $155 a day to pay for a patient, regardless of how costly that care is. The less a company spends, the story said, the more it keeps. According to Medicare statistics, 18 percent of hospices don’t provide continuous nursing care and a similar number don’t have a nurse visit within 48 hours of death, the Post said. To fill the void of publicly usable information, the Post launched a consumer guide so families can compare more than 3,000 hospice companies using self-reported information the companies are required to give to Medicare. Other local hospice providers appear to offer better services than Horizons Hospice, according to the Post. Horizons provided either no or negligible crisis care to its patients, the data said. Reach Jeffrey Benzing at 412-315-0265 or at jbenzing@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @jabenzing. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Aging , Vulnerable populations