Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Should a suspect’s mental illness stop police from drawing guns? by Halle Stockton March 24, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Americans with Disabilities Act extends protections to people with disabilities in schools and workplaces. This week, U.S. Supreme Court justices were asked to determine how the law applies in dangerous situations. Are police officers required to act differently when a disabled or mentally ill person is armed and violent? According to an Associated Press story : The justices heard arguments [Monday] in a dispute over how San Francisco police in 2008 dealt with a woman with schizophrenia who had threatened to kill her social worker. Police ultimately forced their way into Teresa Sheehan’s room at a group home, then shot her after she came at them with a knife. Sheehan survived and later sued the city, claiming police had a duty under the Americans with Disabilities Act to consider her mental illness and take more steps to avoid a violent confrontation. Mental health advocates say that when police know someone has a history of mental illness, they should go into the situation with less aggressive tactics, and that there have been unnecessary shootings because police are not trained in those approaches. But split-second decisions are part of the job in law enforcement. The AP reported that several justices and law enforcement groups shared concerns that asking police officers to hesitate and “second-guess” themselves could put officers and the public at risk. A federal district court has already ruled along the same lines, calling it “unreasonable” to put ADA compliance above the safety of officers and bystanders. The ruling was kicked back by an appeals court. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia gave signs that he might want to punt the case as well. Scalia took issue with the city of San Francisco changing its policy on how the ADA applies in these situations. The AP reported that San Francisco first said the ADA did not apply in police encounters; later, after the Supreme Court accepted the case, the city said it applied but not when a person poses a “direct threat.” According to the story: The Obama administration tried to stake out a middle ground. Deputy Solicitor General Ian Gershengorn told the justices that when a mentally ill person is armed and violent, police should only change tactics if the person is “contained and visible.” That didn’t seem to satisfy Justice Anthony Kennedy. “I think the standard you’ve just proposed gives no guidance at all to an officer faced with a violent person,” Kennedy said. Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. Follow her on Twitter @HalleStockton . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Criminal Justice , Disabilities Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton