Posted in DATA , Inside our Newsroom , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY PublicSource grows again by swalsh June 16, 2014 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Recently, PublicSource was the subject of In The Spotlight, a part of the Heinz Endowments website that allows organizations they fund to tell their own stories. It was an interesting time for us to do that for a couple of reasons. First, we have a number of new people in our newsroom: two reporters, a communications director and a multimedia intern. Second, it’s always good to ask people how they see their jobs. You learn a lot about them. So, rather than telling you about our wonderful new staff members, please take a look at how they describe themselves. We’re excited to have them. They’re smart, hard-working and passionate about journalism. Then, let us know what you’d like to see us do with all this new talent. Jeffrey Benzing Reporter So often, reporting on criminal justice becomes a list of incidents. Shots are fired. Streets are taped off. Drugs are seized. Chasing daily stories is a crucial part of reporting on a community. Citizens need to know where the crime is and how law enforcement is responding. But it’s just as important to take a deeper look at the issues that influence crime and how institutions are handling their obligations to keep the community safe. Read more… Eric Holmberg Data reporter Data journalism is at the core of PublicSource’s mission – to dig deeper and write in-depth stories. I’m Eric Holmberg, one of the newsroom’s newest members, and my job is to help our reporters obtain records and analyze data for their stories. But what does that mean? Read more… Pamela Goldsmith Director of communications The landscape of journalism and the communications field has evolved immensely over the past two decades, leading me to adapt and embrace a precipitously changing environment. Advancing toward this new territory has meant myriad changes for us all, requiring more resources, time and energy to explore its complexity and master new skills. Read more… Molly Duerig Intern In early 2013, when I was a junior at Allegheny College, the school’s trustees considered leasing some of the school’s land for natural gas drilling. As an editor of The Campus , the college’s student-run newspaper, I was pleasantly surprised when a Pittsburgh reporter called me about the topic, which I’d been covering for the paper. Read more… FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice