Posted in Equity , HEALTH , On the beat , posts Stricter rules proposed for school vaccines in PA stir public discussion by Eric Holmberg June 13, 2016 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Needle More than 270 comments were submitted about proposed changes to Pennsylvania’s school vaccination requirements aimed at improving the state’s poor vaccination rates. Last week, a state regulatory commission completed its review of those comments and found several areas where it says the state departments of education and health will have to address questions and justify claims made in the proposed regulations. The Independent Regulatory Review Commission [IRRC] reviews proposed regulations to determine whether regulations are in the public interest by looking at their economic impact and how reasonable they are to implement. A response from the Pennsylvania Department of Health [DOH] to its review is expected this fall when the regulations will be revised and reviewed again by the commission and legislative committees. “DOH is currently reviewing both the IRRC comments as well as the public comments submitted during the comment period,” health department spokesman Wesley Culp wrote in an email. “Once the department has completed this review, we will begin to make any changes to the current draft submitted for public comment.” Because the proposal involves both the state Department of Education and Department of Health, the regulations will need to be approved by the education and health committees in the Legislature. The proposal would reduce the state’s provisional period, the timeframe in which children who have not received all of their required vaccines can get up-to-date. That time period is currently eight months, and the proposal would cut it down to five days. Some people who commented for the review thought the proposed five-day provisional period was too short, and others thought there should be no provisional period. Of the seven nearby states mentioned in the proposed regulations, only West Virginia had a similar provisional period of eight months. Virginia has a 90-day window and the other states — Ohio, New York, New Jersey, Maryland and Delaware — were all listed as having provisional periods between 14 and 20 days. All of those states had far better vaccination rates for the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine than Pennsylvania. The regulations would also add the pertussis, or whooping cough, vaccination to the list of required vaccines. It would also add a second dose of the meningococcal vaccine (MCV) before 12th grade. Some commenters felt the second shot of MCV was unnecessary and significantly raised costs. The IRRC said the department should more fully explain why this should be a part of the final regulations. The department also proposed no longer allowing a parent or guardian to provide written proof of a child having had chicken pox. Among the major organizations supporting or proposing changes to the regulations in public comments were the Pennsylvania Immunization Coalition , Pennsylvania State Education Association and the Pennsylvania School Boards Association . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Companies such as Merck and GlaxoSmithKline also weighed in supporting the value of vaccines. The IRRC report didn’t note broad opposition to the plan as a whole, but many commenters noted specific areas of the rules that they would like to see tweaked in the final version. PublicSource analyzed eight years of state vaccination data in August and found that the state never reached the 95 percent vaccinated threshold for herd immunity for the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine. Most Pennsylvania counties — 50 out of 67 — never reached the herd immunity threshold for measles, mumps and rubella in any of those eight years. Days after the publication of PublicSource’s story, Secretary of Health Karen Murphy wrote an op-ed where she first proposed reducing the provisional period to four days. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-515-0064 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @holmberges . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Vulnerable populations