Posted in IN-DEPTH , Under the Keystone , VIDEO Portrait of an ironworker by Ryan Loew June 6, 2014 July 31, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Standing nearly 30 stories above downtown Pittsburgh, Al Williams — a third-generation ironworker with 36 years of experience — is in his element. The 54-year-old has logged roughly 70,000 hours working on countless structures around Pittsburgh. That’s included  PPG Place, Consol Energy Center and the Liberty Bridge. Now he’s working on the newest addition to Pittsburgh’s skyline, the Tower at PNC Plaza. Construction on the building began in 2012 and is expected to be completed by fall of 2015. Touted as “the world’s greenest office tower,” the 33-story building at 5th Avenue and Wood Street is expected to house offices for 2,200 employees and will serve as world headquarters for the PNC Financial Services Group. Williams, who lives in Peters Township, Pa., has worked virtually every aspect of his job. He’s been on the raising gang, responsible for getting iron beams off the ground and into the air, and on the bolt-up gang, tasked with connecting those beams with heavy duty bolts. Currently he does the decking, laying down corrugated steel flooring that acts as a form for concrete. For Williams, who can look out at the city and recall a lifetime of on-the-job memories, being an ironworker comes with its share of pride. “You’re putting up a building so people can work,” Williams said. “It’s gotta be done, and not everybody can do it.” This story is part of the series: Under the Keystone Welcome to a PublicSource feature, Under the Keystone, that features profiles of interesting people throughout the state.​ Read more about the project >> About the author Standing nearly 30 stories above downtown Pittsburgh, Al Williams — a third-generation ironworker with 36 years of experience — is in his element. The 54-year-old has logged roughly 70,000 hours working on countless structures around Pittsburgh. That’s included  PPG Place, Consol Energy Center and the Liberty Bridge. Now he’s working on the newest addition to Pittsburgh’s skyline, the Tower at PNC Plaza. Construction on the building began in 2012 and is expected to be completed by fall of 2015. Touted as “the world’s greenest office tower,” the 33-story building at 5th Avenue and Wood Street is expected to house offices for 2,200 employees and will serve as world headquarters for the PNC Financial Services Group. Williams, who lives in Peters Township, Pa., has worked virtually every aspect of his job. He’s been on the raising gang, responsible for getting iron beams off the ground and into the air, and on the bolt-up gang, tasked with connecting those beams with heavy duty bolts. Currently he does the decking, laying down corrugated steel flooring that acts as a form for concrete. For Williams, who can look out at the city and recall a lifetime of on-the-job memories, being an ironworker comes with its share of pride. “You’re putting up a building so people can work,” Williams said. “It’s gotta be done, and not everybody can do it.” This story is part of the series: Under the Keystone Welcome to a PublicSource feature, Under the Keystone, that features profiles of interesting people throughout the state.​ Read more about the project >> About the author Ryan Loew Senior Digital Content Editor | 90.5 WESA rloew@wesa.fm @wesaryan Ryan Loew is the Senior Digital Content Editor for 90.5 WESA, Pittsburgh’s NPR news station. He curates web content and produces multimedia stories for the station. Ryan previously worked at as a multimedia producer for The Roanoke Times in Virginia. There he produced in-depth stories on topics including the debate over chronic Lyme disease, the treatment of veterans suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder and the displacement of manufacturing jobs in Southwest and Southside Virginia. Prior to that he worked as a reporter at the Lansing (MI) State Journal . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Employment , Infrastructure , Workplace safety Ryan Loew ryan@publicsource.org x Ryan is a PublicSource visual producer/storyteller. He joined PublicSource after being a freelance producer of news features and documentary stories in the Pittsburgh region and beyond. His work appeared... More by Ryan Loew