Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan September 4, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Big cities nationwide try to prepare for crude oil train disasters A new survey reveals a “patchwork of preparedness” for potential crude oil train disasters among big cities across the nation, including Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, according to The Associated Press . Albany County, New York, sues feds and rail company Albany County officials are suing the U.S. Department of Transportation and a company that moves crude oil through the area in an attempt to improve crude-by-rail safety, according to WRBG CBS 6 Albany. New Jersey keeping crude oil routing information secret Unlike Pennsylvania, which released some information on crude oil routes after being pressured by news organizations, New Jersey refuses to release any data, according to The Associated Press . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Oil slump + new pipelines = tank cars idling on short-line tracks Some of the highly-sought-after crude oil tank cars that only a year ago were hauling North Dakota Bakken crude to East Coast refineries are now parked indefinitely on smaller tracks. These short-line tracks are racking up millions of dollars each month from these unused tank cars, according to Reuters . Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan