Posted in Daily report , posts July 23, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 23, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Sex trafficker pleads guilty The U.S. Attorney’s Office efforts against human trafficking led to another conviction that could result in a life sentence Tuesday. U.S. Attorney David Hickton said more than a dozen people in Western Pennsylvania sell children for sex. Pittsburgh: City council passes film permit legislation Pittsburgh City Council passed an ordinance setting guidelines for the permitting of motion pictures, television and commercial productions Tuesday. It requires a city-issued permit and directs the mayor’s office to set some rules. The council also considered overhauling noise regulations . Fox Chapel: Clinton attends private fundraiser Hillary Clinton spent part of Wednesday at the home of Cindy Shapira, a community activist and wife of the Giant Eagle CEO. The gathering marked Clinton’s first scheduled campaign appearance in the area since declaring her presidential bid. Harrisburg: New pipeline task force The state’s recently formed pipeline task force met on Wednesday. The hearing streamed online, and the Department of Environmental Protection publicly posted the group’s objectives . Allentown: Mayor’s campaign finance filing posted Mayor Ed Pawlowski’s Senate campaign donors are related to a federal subpoena, according to the filing. In total, Pawlowski raised $384,000 for the bid, which he suspended amid a grand jury probe of city contracts and campaign donors. NATIONAL Charleston shooter indicted for federal hate crimes Dylann Roof is charged with nine counts of murder as well as attempted murder and weapons charges for the shooting at Emanuel AME Church in Charleston. South Carolina doesn’t have a hate crimes law , but Roof will be charged by the U.S. Justice Department. Minimum wage advances The Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors voted to increase the minimum wage to $15 an hour by 2020. New York City is also considering raising the wage for food service workers , while in Washington, D.C. , a referendum to boost to $15 an hour will likely appear on the 2016 ballot. For everyone else, the Washington Post shares data on the what the minimum wage actually gets you based on your location. Discover owes $16 million to students About 7,000 people who borrowed from Discover for student loans have been affected by the creditor’s illegal practices. In addition to repaying the affected students about $16 million, Discover must pay a $2.5 million penalty. Alzheimer’s Association reveals initial results of experimental treatment drugs Two different drugs have been fashioned to soak up the amyloid plaque in the brain that contributes to dementia. One study used solanezumab and a placebo; halfway through, they switched the placebo to the real drug and found those who had taken it the whole time improved cognition. The results are far from conclusive, but more trials are expected. IN OTHER NEWS Unpublished Dr. Seuss manuscript found… in a box Theodor Seuss Geisel’s widow donated most of his artwork to the University of California-San Diego, but during recent home renovations she uncovered a box in which she stashed some of his unused drawings. The previously unreleased “ What Pet Should I Get? ” is now available. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman and Elaina Zachos, PublicSource interns. You can reach them with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org and ezachos@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.