Posted in Local Government Schools and counties begin to see payment delays as Pennsylvania’s budget stalemate hits a month Democratic Gov. Josh Shapiro’s administration says billions of dollars in aid to Pennsylvania’s schools and human services will be delayed, as he and the politically divided Legislature struggle to end their month-long budget stalemate. by Marc Levy, Associated Press July 30, 2025 July 30, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pennsylvania Gov. Josh Shapiro talks to the media on June 22. (Photo by Derik Hamilton/AP Photo) HARRISBURG (AP) — Democratic Gov. Josh Shapiro ‘s administration says billions of dollars in aid to Pennsylvania’s schools and human services will be delayed, as he and the politically divided General Assembly struggle to end what is now a month-long budget stalemate . State-supported universities, libraries, early-childhood education programs and county health departments also will see delays in payments, Shapiro’s administration said in letters sent Tuesday to providers. “I recognize this information is concerning, and it is equally concerning to both me and the governor,” Budget Secretary Uri Monson said in the letters. “Our administration continues to work diligently to find agreement between the House and Senate and we will work to support you and your organization as you manage the current situation.” Budget stalemates are also playing out in Michigan and North Carolina, where Democratic governors are sharing power with Republican legislators. Pennsylvania school districts, which received more than $11 billion last year from the state for operations, will see delays on more than $2 billion in payments through August, Shapiro’s administration said. District officials have said the poorest districts might have to borrow money if aid is delayed in August. Universities, such as Penn State and state-run system schools, will see delays on more than $200 million in aid and counties will not get on-time payments of $390 million to child welfare agencies, it said. More than $100 million in payments to a range of other agencies, nonprofits and programs will also be delayed, according to the administration’s letters. It also said it cannot distribute money to early childhood education providers. Shapiro and top Republican lawmakers have said they are engaged in closed-door discussions to try to find a compromise. Neither the state House nor state Senate have scheduled a voting session for this week. Without the governor’s signature on a new spending plan, the state lost some of its spending authority starting July 1. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow