Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan October 30, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Congress extends positive train control deadline U.S. legislators voted this week to extend a deadline by three years for railroads to implement a train safety system. Positive train control is a system installed on tracks to prevent crashes and will automatically slow down or stop trains if a train engineer goes over a speed limit or misses a signal. Railroads have said for years that they couldn’t meet the original Dec. 31 deadline and threatened to suspend service if the deadline was not extended. Montana report finds crude-by-rail safety in state lacking A new state audit found Montana has no active rail safety plan, employs only two rail inspectors and has a lack of statewide emergency planning and emergency response capability if an oil spill or explosion occurs on a train. New York announces results of oil train safety checks State and federal railroad inspectors found six “critical defects” that require immediate repair and another 80 “non-critical defects,” which have to be repaired within 30 days, on rail lines used to ship crude oil in New York. The critical defects included a cracked or broken joint bar and missing bolts on a 60-mile set of tracks owned by CSX, according to The Albany Times Union . The railroad also operates crude oil trains in Pennsylvania. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @ khantasha . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan