Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts PublicSource event focuses on sexual assault in the military by Emily DeMarco December 3, 2012 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X On Nov. 29, PublicSource hosted its first public event at the Pittsburgh Center for the Arts. With more than 60 people in attendance, the event featured the screening of ‘The Invisible War,’ a documentary film about sexual assault in the military. After the film, PublicSource Editor Sharon Walsh moderated a panel of guests from across the state. Panelists discussed reasons sexual assault is so pervasive within the military. They offered solutions that are available to service members struggling with the repercussions of sexual assault, noting that sexual violence is a deeply-rooted problem among military and civilian societies alike. Special thanks to all of our panelists, including Jessica Kenyon of Benefiting Veterans ; Ali Mailen Perrotto of the National Sexual Violence Resource Center ; Dr. Katie McCorkle of Balanced Heart Healing Center ; and Jacqueline Shellaby of Veterans Place . Show/hide captions Photos by A. Jason Coleman and Alexandra Kanik FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.