Posted in FIRST PERSON Born without a left hand, Isaac Merz shares about his journey as a musician by Ryan Loew March 2, 2020 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X ﻿ ﻿ ﻿ ﻿ The first song Isaac Merz learned on the guitar was Nirvana’s “Come As You Are.” Born without a left hand, the 11-year-old budding musician improvised: He picked up his mother’s right-handed guitar and played it upside down. But he found the experience lacking, so after finding some of his father’s packaging tape, he had a light bulb moment. “I thought, well this is logical,” Merz said. “I’m just going to tape a guitar pick to a paper clip because that will give it a base, and then I can just go ahead and use this packaging tape and I can tape that all up onto my hand, and boom, it’s like I’m holding a pick, like anyone else would be holding a pick.” It’s a technique Merz uses to this day (sans paper clip), as the 37-year-old singer-songwriter’s passion for music has taken him to Arizona and New York to perform. Now back in his hometown of Pittsburgh, Merz plays in the alternative fusion rock band Merz, Miller and The Wolves as well as an acoustic duo with his partner Jamie Kunning called Brave Birr. Merz said that, throughout his day-to-day life, he frequently encounters people who react uncomfortably or are hesitant to ask about his missing hand, something he understands but wishes wouldn’t happen. “I tend to hope that people just find it in themself that it’s OK, and if you say something, you know, awkward or different that I’m not going to get mad or personally offended,” Merz said. “I tell people all the time it’s not like I wake up every morning and I’m shocked that I have one hand.” He wants people to know he sees how he was born as a blessing and a challenge that’s pushed him to feel more empowered in his life. Do you have a message you want to pass on to Isaac? Email firstperson@publicsource.org and we’ll get it to him. Ryan Loew is a visual storyteller/producer for PublicSource. He can be reached at ryan@publicsource.org or on Twitter at @RyanLoew . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram Ryan Loew ryan@publicsource.org x Ryan is a PublicSource visual producer/storyteller. He joined PublicSource after being a freelance producer of news features and documentary stories in the Pittsburgh region and beyond. His work appeared... More by Ryan Loew