Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts Pennsylvania gets a ‘C’ in lobbying disclosure by Eric Holmberg August 13, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Lobbying in Washington D.C. A variety of positive and negative aspects of Pennsylvania’s lobbying disclosure law netted out to a ‘C’ grade for the state in a recent study of lobbying disclosure in all 50 states by the Sunlight Foundation . Pennsylvania lost points because lobbyists in the state do not have to reveal which pieces of legislation they tried to influence and lobbyists don’t have to report itemized lobbying expenses if they total less than $2,500 in a quarter. But, the state received good marks for requiring lobbyists to itemize expenses in quarters above the $2,500 threshold and for requiring lobbyists to put expenses into categories such as food or travel. Pennsylvania also received a point for putting its lobbying registration and expenditure reports online. From the story : “…many states fail to address the legislative flaws that create unfortunate loopholes, do not provide citizens with easily accessible information and navigable websites, and lack stringent transparency policies.” Seven states received an ‘A’ from the foundation: California, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, South Carolina and Wisconsin. In New Jersey, lobbyists must disclose conflicts of interest, such as whether they ever served in a variety of political positions, including independent authorities and municipal utilities. Four states received an ‘F’ — Florida, Nevada, Oregon and West Virginia. Florida received the lowest possible score on the foundation’s grading scale because lobbyists there don’t report their expenses, what legislation they are trying to influence and the public can’t access lobbying disclosures or expenses online. You can see the full scorecard here . From the story : Regardless of the legal language, if the state agency overseeing lobbying offers a clunky website, then finding the disclosed information becomes a real hassle. Kansas chooses not to hold any lobbying data before 2015 on its website. Further, the data presented are not machine-readable nor downloadable in bulk — a criticism applicable to many states. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @holmberges . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI