Posted in THE RED ZONE Community callout: Are you a Pittsburgh-area college student who has experienced sexual violence or misconduct? by Public Source March 11, 2022 October 4, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Sexual assault and harassment among students — on and off college campuses — remains underreported. Often, some students do not even have the language to describe what happened to them. More than half of sexual assaults among college students occur in the fall. Resources, survivor stories and investigation into what’s being done to protect those at risk in the Pittsburgh area. Explore the series . Our newsroom is working on a project focused on stories of sexual assault, sexual harrassment and sexual transgressions on and off campuses. We would like to speak with current and former students in Pittsburgh willing to share their stories as well as victim advocates, law enforcement and others working to keep these student communities safe. PublicSource is seeking stories from people of all identities and backgrounds. LGBTQ+ students, students of color and students with disabilities face higher risks of sexual violence in college, but are underrepresented in this conversation and coverage. If you or someone you know has an experience or perspective to share, please fill out the form below or get in touch with us at yourstory@publicsource.org or by Signal at 412-432-9669. Name Email (We won’t publish or share this information. A reporter may use it to follow up with you.) (Required) Please share your thoughts below: Δ Explore this series The Red Zone More than half of sexual assaults among college students occur in the fall. Resources, survivor stories and investigation into what’s being done to protect those at risk in the Pittsburgh area. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow , Pittsburgh , sexual violence