Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 16, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 16, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: PPG wrapped up a $3.8 million expansion PPG Industries completed an expansion in Spain , providing them with new mixing and blending equipment. This development will back an 80 percent increase in annual production for automotive parts and industrial applications. Pittsburgh: Plum teacher arrested for sexual relationship with student A third Plum teacher was arrested for allegedly having sex with a 15-year-old female student. Michael Cinefra, a substitute teacher for the district, faces nine charges including involuntary deviate sexual intercourse and supplying alcohol to minors. Allegheny County District Attorney Stephen Zappala Jr. said the case is unrelated to the first two. Philadelphia: Teen allegedly planned an ISIS inspired attack on Pope The FBI arrested a 15-year-old boy outside of Philadelphia last month after he allegedly threatened an ISIS-inspired attack on Pope Francis during his visit to the U.S. The teen, charged with attempt to provide material support to a terrorist organization, obtained explosives instructions and proceeded to spread that information through social media. Harrisburg: Ex-mayor Reed’s corruption case will go to court A judge ruled that former Harrisburg Mayor Stephen Reed will go to trial and face 485 counts of bribery, corruption, theft and other charges. Reed allegedly hoarded state artifacts and convinced people to approve public borrowings. Reed’s lawyer Henry Hockeimer states that more than 300 charges exceed the statute of limitation. Statewide: More Pennsylvania students considered homeless The number of homeless students attending public schools in the state increased by 18 percent, more than doubling the national average increase between the 2012-13 and 2013-14 school year, according to the U.S. Department of Education. Local experts said that the inability to conquer homelessness after the 2008 recession is just one factor that contributed to this increase. NATIONAL Houston school bus crash kills two students Two students are dead and two other students and a bus driver are seriously injured after a Houston Independent School District bus fell off an overpass . Witnesses said the bus nose-dived and landed on its side on the access road below after swerving to avoid another car. Five fraternity members face third-degree murder charges After the death of 19-year-old Michael Deng in December 2013, five members of the Pi Delta Psi fraternity at Baruch College in New York face third-degree murder charges, and a grand jury recommended charges against 37 other members.  Deng blacked out from a head injury when he and other pledges were blindfolded in a hazing ritual where they were forced to carry backpacks full of sand while fraternity brothers tackled them. Ben Carson catches up to Trump in the polls Republican voters continue to back Donald Trump in the polls with 27 percent support, but Ben Carson, retired neurosurgeon, is now sitting comfortably beside him with 23 percent support according to the CBS News/New York Times poll. Deadly flash floods in Utah As of Tuesday afternoon, at least nine people are dead and four are missing after flash flooding engulfed cars along the Utah-Arizona border. Two vehicles, packed with 13 children and three women, had gone to watch the torrential flooding and ran into the debris-filled waters. WORLD Hungary shuts key route and detains refugees Hungarian authorities declared a state of emergency , sealed the southern Serbian border and detained 60 refugees Tuesday after they illegally attempted to enter the country. Tens of thousands of refugees have used this route to escape terrorism and reach the European Union. IN OTHER NEWS Facebook working on long-awaited ‘dislike’ button Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg said Tuesday that the company is working on an idea for a dislike button that should be ready to test soon. This surprisingly complicated task has been demanded for years by site users. The daily report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.