Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan June 12, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been at least six train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. *Interested in learning more about the risks of crude oil trains in Pennsylvania? Join us at 6:30 p.m. June 17 for a panel discussion we’re hosting in Pittsburgh at Carnegie Mellon University. Sign up and learn more here . More track inspectors needed in Pennsylvania The Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission chair told state senators at a hearing on crude-by-rail safety this week in Harrisburg that the state needs more inspectors to monitor the more than 5,000 miles of track in state. Crash in Minnesota between crude oil and flour truck A BNSF Railway Co. train hauling crude oil collided on Tuesday with a truck carrying flour. There were no injuries and no spills, but Minnesota’s governor visited the scene to urge for more rail safety funding in the state, according to Forum News Service. Oil firms shell out billions to victims of Quebec train crude-oil train disaster Oil giants, including Shell, Marathon and ConocoPhillips, have contributed to a $345 million fund for victims of the July 2013 crash in Lac-Mégantic, Quebec. Still, the energy industry maintains it wasn’t responsible for the crash, according to Dow Jones Business News. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor All they can do is let it burn, firefighters say Firefighters who fought crude-oil train fires in Illinois, Virginia and Quebec attended a meeting in Albany, N.Y., this week and explained the realities of fighting an oil fire, according to the Albany Times Union. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan