Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan January 8, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Over the past several years, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Harvard law clinic will help challenge federal oil train laws Lawyers and students from an environmental law clinic at Harvard University will help Albany County, N.Y., and national environmental groups sue the U.S. government over oil train safety rules passed last year. The groups claim the rules aren’t strict enough and allow unsafe tank cars to stay in operation for too long. New York communities will get foam from feds Nineteen New York communities along oil train routes will receive firefighting foam from the federal government this year. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security will be in charge of training local emergency response officials on trailers equipped with foam to fight oil fires. Are regulators focused on the right safety improvements? Over the past year, there have been several articles written about how federal regulators have been too focused on rules for tank car safety rather than implementing stricter rules for track maintenance and rail defect prevention. A recent Columbus Dispatch analysis found two-thirds of rail incidents occur because of human error and track defects. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting New method for making oil safer to be tested in North Dakota A new way of taming the volatility of crude oil, to reduce the chance that it will explode, before it leaves North Dakota on trains will be tested this year. The new method comes after North Dakota officials found an increase in oil producers not complying with requirements for oil conditioning, which removes flammable gases before shipment. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org or 412-315-0261. Follow her on Twitter @khantasha . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan