Posted in Public-service guides Will our weather worsen? What to do before, during and after the flood. With wet weather expected to continue setting records in and around Pittsburgh, it’s important to prepare, according to officials and experts. by Delaney Rauscher Adams and Miranda Jeyaretnam May 7, 2024 May 7, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Photos via Canva. (Photo illustration by Natasha Vicens/PublicSource) One of the wettest Aprils to date flooded much of Point State Park, rendered roads and bridges undrivable and left residents dealing with transportation problems, insurance questions and damage to their homes. When roads close and homes flood, it’s hard to find the information needed to move forward. In preparation for the next downpour, here are answers to questions that emerged from PublicSource’s outreach to readers affected by the rain. Environment ‘My relationship with Mother Nature may never recover’: Southwestern Pa. residents share how record rainfall affected them From leaky ceilings to flooded basements, evacuations to broken bridges, altered youth sports schedules to the joys of walking in the rain, locals share snippets of stories, photos and videos from the region’s historically wet April. What caused the record rainfall and flooding? A combination of factors lead to significant flooding issues in Pittsburgh. “The terrain doesn’t help,” said Tony Igwe, senior group manager of stormwater at the Pittsburgh Water & Sewer Authority [PWSA]. “If you live down close to the rivers … once it starts raining, the water gets down pretty fast to those areas.” Igwe said the biggest factor that contributes to flooding is the rate of development in comparison to the size of the sewers, many of which were built around a century ago, and some of which haven’t been improved to handle increased rainfall. “The last piece is the whole idea of climate effects,” said Igwe. “[We’re] now looking at more severe, intense storms.” Is rainfall and flooding expected to worsen? The decadeslong trend of increasing rainfall is not expected to stop, according to Igwe. “We anticipate it getting worse,” he said. “It’s something that is here to stay.” Tim Cermak, an executive officer at the National Weather Service Pittsburgh, said that heavy rainfall is more likely with a warming climate because warm air holds more moisture than cold air. He added that urban development, especially in hilly areas, leads to more runoff and flash flooding of roads and yards. To mitigate flash floods, sewers should be cleared of debris and areas should have more greenspace, Cermak said. People cross Forbes Avenue in the rain in Oakland on March 26. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Cermak said the dams along the Allegheny, Monongahela and Ohio rivers help to mitigate the effects of heavy rainfall. Flooding which reached 28 feet at the Ohio River in downtown Pittsburgh would have risen “significantly higher” if it were not for the series of dams. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Igwe said PSWA has to balance these factors against the steep expenses that come with updating infrastructure. “The question is, what’s the sweet spot of what people can live with and what we can afford?” Igwe said. “And as we do that planning, we also need to be factoring in the impact of climate change.” How can you assess the flood risk in your area? Put your address into the Pennsylvania Flood Risk Tool for a summary of the flood risk. Sign up for Wireless Emergency Alerts of emergency weather situations. Make sure your device’s settings are conducive to receiving emergency messages. “Think of how similar storms have impacted you typically in the past,” Igwe said, urging residents to keep an eye open if weather stations are reporting a level of rainfall that has previously affected you or your home. Economy & Housing Updated: County touts, but does not detail, ‘severe weather’ plan for unhoused amid camp clearance Allegheny County has told homelessness services providers that existing overflow beds will be available, though reports from those providers suggest they are already mostly full. The city, meanwhile, has taken steps to oust one cluster of unhoused campers. How can I protect my home and property from water-related damage? Igwe points to PWSA’s resource page on flood preparedness for information about making a plan when you anticipate a flood, but added that protecting your home could be as easy as clearing off leaves. “One of the easiest things they could do is as you drive home and walk by the catch basins that are close to your house … make sure it’s clear,” he said. Prepare for a potential power outage by: Ensuring that essential items and emergency supply kits are within reach, including medication, blankets, batteries and flashlights Charging all important electronic devices in advance of an expected storm Having an alternate source of heating available if possible. In heavy rain, where do you look for info on which roads/bridges are closed? 511PA is a comprehensive way to access information on Pennsylvania road conditions. The website tracks and reports all road closures and disruption in the state, and can display weather alerts. The site also includes a camera feature that allows users to observe the state of the roads in real time. What do you do if you’re driving and come upon a watery roadway? Do not drive on a flooded road. According to the National Weather Service website, just a foot of water is enough to float some cars. When you encounter a road that appears to be underwater, turn around. What do you do if you think your electric or gas is compromised? If your house or basement floods, turn off the power to all appliances and leave them off, according to Lee Gierczynski, a spokesperson for Columbia Gas. Call your gas company: If the natural gas is shut off at the meter If water levels cover your gas meter If flooding has impacted your natural gas appliances. Floodwaters can shift your home or appliances, which can result in a gas leak. If you suspect a gas leak, stop what you are doing, leave to a safe location and call 911 and your gas company. Ashley Macik, a spokesperson for Duquesne Light, said that the company recommends people avoid downed power lines and dead or dying trees, or trees with dangling limbs. People can report outages to power companies, including via Duquesne Light’s website or by calling 888-393-7000. Local Government PWSA’s stormwater director says Pittsburgh needs to fix flooding problems, even if the likely new mayor is wary of raising rates PWSA no longer just deals with your drinking water and sewage. Now it’s also taking responsibility for the flooding in your basement. Do public agencies — water, sewer, emergency response — have roles when homes flood? PSWA responds to storms both in preparation and after the fact. Prior to a forecasted storm, the agency will typically clean some catch basins, said Igwe, to “make sure that once the storm starts and gets heavy, you can actually get water into the sewer that’s underneath.” During and after the flooding, PWSA workers sweep hotspot areas where flooding occurs to determine the extent of the damage. This way they can determine why it’s happening and if something in the sewer system is slowing the flow. “Obviously, if it’s a really large storm where you have overland flooding in some cases you may have [water] up to three to four feet deep. There’s not much to do except make sure that people are not trying to drive to those kinds of areas,” Igwe said. The city Department of Public Works and Fire Bureau may also participate in flood response. If you must leave home, who helps? Ready.gov provides resources to help individuals plan for disaster situations, including direction to mass care shelters if you need to vacate your home. Texting SHELTER and a zip code to 43362 will direct you to open shelters in the area. Shelters will provide food and other basic necessities during your stay. What does insurance typically cover when a house floods? If you were impacted by the flooding on April 11 and 12, financial assistance is available from the Small Business Administration’s Disaster Loan Program, as of a May 2 announcement. The program offers low-interest loans for affected homeowners, renters, private non-profits and businesses in Allegheny County and five of its surrounding counties—Armstrong, Beaver, Butler, Washington and Westmoreland. Homeowners can apply for up to $500,000 to cover damage to their primary residences, while homeowners and renters can secure up to $100,000 for damage to personal property. The program also offers up to $2 million to businesses and most private non-profits to cover losses not fully covered by insurance. A person walks through the rain on the University of Pittsburgh’s Oakland campus on March 26. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Generally, homeowner’s insurance does not cover water damage when the source of flooding comes from outside of your home. But calling your insurance provider can be helpful in directing you toward next steps. The Federal Emergency Management Agency also offers resources that can help you find flood-specific insurance. There are two kinds of flood insurance offered: building insurance for your home, and content insurance for personal belongings. These policies don’t take effect immediately, often starting in 30 days. What do you do about floodwater and potential mold? In the City of Pittsburgh, report home flooding to PWSA, said Igwe. “[It] at least helps us have data on the map and then the next step would be for us to confirm if it’s something that is much more of a bigger issue,” he said. He urged homeowners to be very wary of floodwater and “treat it as contaminated water.” It can take less than 24 to 48 hours for mold to develop in a flooded home. To prevent or remove mold after a flood, you should: Ventilate your home by opening doors and windows (if the humidity outside is lower than indoors) and using fans and dehumidifiers Throw out soaked carpeting, insulation, wallboard and ceiling tiles Discard wet items that cannot dry completely Clean out standing water with a wet/dry vacuum and clean hard surfaces with a 10% bleach solution — but never mix bleach and ammonia as the vapors are toxic Remove mold using clean water and detergent Wait for your home to dry completely — typically two or three days — before rebuilding or replacing items. Exposure to mold can result in difficulty breathing, congestion, eye or skin irritation and fatigue. If you have asthma or are immunocompromised, these symptoms may be exacerbated. While in a moldy environment and especially while cleaning, wear protective gear like masks, respirators, gloves and goggles, and wash what you are wearing immediately after cleaning. Delaney Rauscher Adams is a former editorial intern at PublicSource and can be reached at drauscheradams@gmail.com . Miranda Jeyaretnam is an editorial intern at PublicSource and can be reached at miranda@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , environment , flooding , insurance , natural disaster , Pittsburgh , rain , rainfall , resource guide , service guide