Posted in Equity , PUBLIC SAFETY Professional-friendly resources for help dealing with addiction by Alexandra Kanik December 15, 2015 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Check your benefits. Many companies pay for confidential counseling through an Employee Assistance Program. These are intended to help employees find treatment and resume their careers. Services are often available for family members. Check professional groups . Confidential help is available in a variety of professional fields. Below are a few organizations in Pennsylvania that focus on specific industries: Lawyers Concerned for Lawyers offers free help for lawyers, judges and their immediate family members, as well as law students. Reach the helpline at 1-888-999-1941. Physicians’ Health Programs at the Foundation of the Pennsylvania Medical Society provides addiction help to Pennsylvania doctors and medical students, including a clinical assessment and long-term recovery plan. Reach the emergency line at (717) 558-7817. Pennsylvania Nurse Peer Assistance Program provides help for nurses and nursing students. To get help, call 877-298-7627 ext. 1. S.A.R.P.H. Pharmacy Peer Assistance Program provides assessments and referrals for pharmacists and pharmacy students in need of addiction treatment. To get help, call 1-800-892-4484. Find local treatment. Statewide information on treatment locations is available from the Pennsylvania Department of Drug and Alcohol Programs . Concerned about insurance? Click here for information on benefits and what companies are required to provide. Visit the Pittsburgh pages of DrugAbuse.com and Recovery.org to find substance abuse treatment programs and support groups in the area. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Criminal Justice , Drug abuse and rehabilitation , Resource , Vulnerable populations