Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Five adults, unborn child murdered in Wilkinsburg by Jeffrey Benzing March 10, 2016 February 20, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Read our recent series on murders in Pittsburgh. The killings of five people and an unborn child in Wilkinsburg on Wednesday night have drawn national headlines after two suspected gunmen opened fire in what has been described as a calculated attack. Allegheny County District Attorney Stephen A. Zappala Jr. described the carnage as one of the most brutal murders he’s seen in 18 years in office, according to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . A motive is not known, though retaliation is possible, the story said. The victims were identified as Jerry Shelton, 35; Tina Shelton, 37; Brittany Powell, 27; Chanetta Powell, 25; and Shada Mahone, 26, according to the Allegheny County medical examiner’s office. Chanetta Powell was due to give birth in May, the Post-Gazette said. Three of the victims were siblings; the other two were their cousins. From the Post-Gazette today: An ATF agent this afternoon described the horrific scene of Wednesday night’s mass shooting: a man shot as he tried to get in a back door of a Wilkinsburg home, and three women trapped behind him under a barrage of gunfire that left one of them with 50 bullet wounds. PublicSource recently examined the repeating tragedy of unsolved homicides in Pittsburgh, which borders Wilkinsburg. Neighborhood violence , often tied to retaliation, has had a disparate impact on the city’s black community. A $20,000 reward for information on the two suspected shooters has been announced by the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. Reach Jeffrey Benzing at 412-315-0265 or at jbenzing@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @jabenzing . Explore our investigative series: Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice