Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 15, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 15, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: City to revert to self-insured health care Officials announced a plan that would have Pittsburgh pay for health insurance claims instead of putting that responsibility on insurance carriers. The switch is scheduled for Jan. 1, and will include continued coverage for Highmark and Aetna providers. Pittsburgh: Senior center funds halted The Parks and Recreation Department froze accounts funded by seniors for senior citizens’ centers in order to investigate “unusual” transactions last week. Director Jim Griffin says the city will try to lift the hold by the end of the week. Harrisburg: Supreme Court judge apologizes for emails Justice J. Michael Eakin apologized for sending inappropriate emails on an account under the name “John Smith.” His apology comes two days after the Court said it would hire a lawyer to probe Eakin’s emails. Harrisburg: Environmentalists endorse Supreme Court candidates Four environmental groups endorsed three Democratic candidates for the state Supreme Court . Sustainability, the groups say, will be a statewide concern in the coming years. Mount Pleasant: Threat causes youth football to cancel season The area’s Junior Football League called off the rest of its season after someone left bullet casings near the football field where it played. The names of league officials were written on the casings. NATIONAL Planned Parenthood changes policy The family planning center announced it will stop accepting reimbursement for programs that supply fetal tissue for research purposes. Controversial videos allegedly showing the group’s officials discussing the sale of fetal tissue prompted the policy change. Detroit child sex trafficking scheme busted FBI officials arrested 12 suspected pimps as part of Operation Cross Country IX. Twenty-five people were arrested in Western Pennsylvania and West Virginia in the same law enforcement action. California drops inmate firefighter proposal Officials are going back on their plan to let convicts who have violent backgrounds work in the state’s inmate firefighting unit . But California will still expand the program with other prisoners, said a corrections spokesman. Missing boy found dead Authorities found the body of a 3-year-old boy who went missing Tuesday. The child’s body was found a mile from his New Jersey home, and police are investigating the cause of his death. IN OTHER NEWS Love hurts A woman in New York City sued her 12-year-old nephew for aggressively hugging and injuring her at his birthday party four years ago. The suit, which she lost, included $127,000 for a broken wrist she got after he enthusiastically jumped into her arms. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI