Posted in Equity Teen-led demonstration outside the City-County Building turns into a march through downtown Pittsburgh by Matt Petras June 20, 2020 June 21, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Nick Anglin, 18, pauses for a 16-minute moment of silence — one minute for every Black trans woman killed in 2020. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) About 200 people took to the street Saturday afternoon in front of the City-County Building Downtown for a protest organized by Black, Young and Educated that turned into a march by the evening. The event continued the daily string of protests that has gone on for three weeks in Pittsburgh following the killing of George Floyd, a Black man, while in police custody in Minneapolis. This demonstration is part of the Civil Saturday series of protests from BYE, an activist group made up of local teenagers. Much of the day’s demonstration focused on Black transgender people and Black intersectionality. Nick Anglin, 18, read the names of every Black trans woman killed in 2020, followed by a 16-minute moment of silence — one minute for each name read. Jasiri X, executive director of 1Hood Media, reads a list of 12 demands The Allegheny County Black Activist/Organizer Collective presented to Mayor Bill Peduto and Allegheny County Executive Rich Fitzgerald earlier in the week. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Local activist and rapper Jasiri X spoke at the event, focusing on reading, explaining and rallying the crowd behind the list of 12 demands The Allegheny County Black Activist/Organizer Collective presented to Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto and Allegheny County Executive Rich Fitzgerald this week; the list includes calls to defund police, disband private police departments and end cash bail. Jasiri X referenced the City-County Building lighting up green, red and yellow in honor of Juneteenth when he explained he wants to see concrete policy change. “We’ve had enough symbols,” he said. “We need some substance.” Much of the event was spent doing organized chants. A few times, those with megaphones would instruct each side of the crowd to chant separate, related phrases. At one point, the left side chanted “defund the police” and the right chanted “refund the people’s peace.” Devante Brown, 25, of Wheeling, W. Va., (center) plays a snare drum during a demonstration organized by Black, Young and Educated on Saturday. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Later, organizers allowed anyone who wished to grab a microphone and speak. One man, Malik Abrams, from Homewood, used his time to sing. Another, Cory Roma, 20, noted he was 12 when Trayvon Martin was killed. “We have been dealing with this long enough, and it’s time that we end it,” Roma said. Keely Savage, a white woman, also volunteered to speak and urged other white people to use their privilege to fight for the rights of Black people. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “We need to come together,” she said. Protesters march down Grant Street in Downtown Pittsburgh on Saturday, June 20. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) After 6 p.m., the protestors began to march down Grant Street before making a circle back to the City-County Building, pausing for a while on Fort Pitt Boulevard. For much of the march, the crowd sang the iconic protest song “Which Side Are You On?”. When the crowd reassembled at the City-County Building, Anglin said they plan to host another event next weekend. “This won’t change,” he said, “until I see some change.” Matt Petras is a freelance reporter based in the Pittsburgh area as well as a writing and journalism tutor for Point Park University. He can be reached at matt456p@gmail.com or on Twitter @mattApetras . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram