Posted in COVID-19 Here’s how you can support organizations and efforts helping people affected by the coronavirus outbreak by Pittsburgh news partners March 20, 2020 May 27, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photo by Lisa Cunningham/Pittsburgh City Paper) The novel coronavirus is changing how we live and work in very disruptive ways. These organizations are helping to provide food, money and other assistance to those impacted by the shutdowns. Here are some ways you can contribute: Food assistance: Donate to the Greater Pittsburgh Community Food Bank as it feeds local families during the pandemic. Or volunteer . Volunteer for 412 Food Rescue . The food waste nonprofit is in need of volunteers. Donate to Arnold’s Tea via CashApp ($ARNOLDSTEA2020) as they’re preparing and handing out free meals daily. Support the Hugh Lane Wellness Foundation in making care packages and delivering goods to LGBTQ+ folks in need. To coordinate donations, email Sarah@hughlane.org . Restaurant Workers Mutual Aid Fund is collecting food donations at the Irma Freeman Center. Help local restaurants giving food to frontline workers with this Feeding the Frontline PGH grassroots fundraiser. Donate online to the South Hills Interfaith Movement to help them restock their three food pantries and provide other critical services, such as utility and financial assistance. Financial assistance: Donate to the United Way Worldwide COVID-19 Community Response and Recovery Fund. Call 211 to inquire about getting local assistance. Give to the Emergency Action Fund to help regional nonprofits respond to community needs in the pandemic. Donate to the Pittsburgh COVID-19 LGBTQIA Emergency Relief Fund , created by SisTers PGH. It will prioritize members of the LGBTQ community who often experience disproportionate rates of violence, poverty and housing insecurity. The fundraiser has a goal of $100,000 and will begin taking applications for relief on March 20. Give to the Bloomfield Garfield Corporation Emergency Fund , creating a crisis fund that helps people with rent and other needs. Casa San Jose is collecting funds for coronavirus response to support Latino families in Pittsburgh. Donate to a Refugee Assistance Fund launched by Hello Neighbor, which aims to provide $250 in cash assistance to refugee families enrolled in its program. The families will receive funds by May 1. Help struggling Pittsburghers buy groceries , fill their gas tank, and more through the Pandemic of Love organization. Help area journalists facing layoffs , furloughs and pay cuts by donating to the Western Pa. Journalist Emergency Relief Fund. Helping affected workers and businesses: Tip directly to service workers whose livelihoods are hurting with this virtual tip jar. Support local artists through the Pittsburgh Artist Emergency Fund, which provides up to $250 to help with rent, bills, food and other essentials. Donate refunds you receive from canceled performances, at the request of the Pittsburgh Stage Employee Bailout, if you can. Donate money to help hourly workers who won’t get paid during the COVID-19 shutdown. Donate money to a fund that will provide small stipends to restaurant workers in the Greater Pittsburgh region. The group hopes to provide $150 to workers who apply on an as-needed basis. Raise emergency funds for service industry workers with this fundraiser by TABLE Magazine and Community Kitchen. To support the Mr. Small’s Employee Relief Fund, which will benefit their 40-person staff, you can make a donation via their GoFundMe campaign . Support Pittsburgh makers with this new online store through PG&H. To help visual and performing artists, the entertainment and events industry and small businesses, you can support Redfishbowl’s RafflePGH Program . The virtual hub includes benefit raffles and auctions, promotional livestreams and features with venues, collectives and nonprofits impacted by COVID-19. Google has a new free online digital skills training platform for jobseekers and small business owners. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Youth: Donate breast milk to the Mid-Atlantic Mothers’ Milk Bank. Visit the site, call 412-281-4400 or email info@midatlanticmilkbank.org to learn about the donation process. Help the Homeless Children’s Education Fund . The organization is struggling to provide the care and structure its vulnerable students need during this time of school and business closings. Donations can be made here. Those in need of help can follow this link . The Western Pennsylvania Diaper Bank is looking for help to continue distribution of diapers by requesting monetary donations . Another option is to order diapers online on Amazon to be delivered to 201 N. Braddock Ave., Suite 124, Pittsburgh PA 15208. Drop off diapers, formula and canned goods or donate to Beverly’s Birthdays to help the parents and families they work with. Drop off anytime in a box outside at 9799 Laurel Ave., North Huntingdon, PA 15642 or send a financial donation. Donate to the Western Pennsylvania Diaper Bank to help continue regular distributions of diapers. Another option is to order diapers online on Amazon to be delivered to 201 N. Braddock Ave., Suite 124, Pittsburgh, PA 15208. Support youth in foster care and their families by donating to the Foster Love Project Emergency Relief Fund. Seniors: Check in on a senior buddy or help if they get sick as part of the Lawrenceville/Bloomfield/Garfield “Buddy” System. Drive for South West Meals On Wheels . Volunteers are needed as many of the volunteers are seniors who have been encouraged to stay home. Kitchen help is also needed. Call to check on seniors you know who may be feeling isolated or fearful. Also follow CDC and WHO guidelines to reduce the spread of coronavirus. Send a note or a card that will be shared with residents, patients and team members of the Presbyterian SeniorCare Network. Visit Sr.Care.org/RaysOfSunshine for details. Volunteer to assist with deliveries and to make friendly phone calls to seniors. Register here. Make check-in calls or deliver food and medication to seniors in need as part of an effort by Archangel Gabriel Parish in Mckees Rocks/Stowe/Kennedy/Robinson area. Medical Donate blood or volunteer to help with the blood shortage . Several blood drives are coming up at the JCC. Donate personal protection equipment to Pittsburgh-area medical providers, and medical providers can request what they need. This group will do pickup and dropoff. Donate personal protection equipment; disinfectant cleaners, sprays or wipes; or hand sanitizer of any size by filling out this form or sending an email to the office of the Allegheny County executive at COVID19Donations@alleghenycounty.us . Donate to the Western Pennsylvania Fund for Choice , which funds access to safe abortion care for low-income people in Pennsylvania, Ohio and West Virginia. Support the Western Pennsylvania COVID Avengers who are 3D printing, laser cutting, packaging, shipping, and delivering complete clear plastic face shields to help protect medical professionals in our region. Donate to the COVID-19 relief fund through the Allegheny County Medical Society, supporting things like 3D printed PPE. Help get protective masks to trans and queer Pittsburghers who need them by supporting the Pgh MasQUe ProjecT. Use your bike (or car) to help Operation Face Mask Pittsburgh get protective gear to those who need it. Frontline workers can find mental health support for COVID-19 with this listing of local therapists offering four free appointments. Providers can email to have their name added to list. Other Donate paper products, hand sanitizer, disinfectant wipes and hand soap to the Women’s Center & Shelter of Greater Pittsburgh . Please contact Kristin Brown at brownk@wscpittsburgh.org. Or make a monetary donation . Donate gloves, masks, disinfecting wipes or spray, a forehead thermometer, hand sanitizer and non-perishable food items to POWER House, a residential facility providing addiction treatment for women in Allegheny County. Secure pick-up/drop-off of donations can be arranged by calling 412-760-4602 or emailing bklemm@power-recovery.com. Help animals in need by making a monetary donation or donating pet supplies to any of the following: the Humane Animal Rescue , the Pittsburgh Cat , Animal Friends or Hello Bully . Volunteer for United Way of Southwestern Pennsylvania . North Side residents can volunteer to be a buddy. The program allows residents to seek a “buddy” who will check on and help care for them if they get sick. Decorate a postcard for frontline workers with this Listen, Lucy campaign. Let your neighbors know if you’re making a grocery trip and ask if they have any essentials you can pick up and leave at their door. Donate to the Community Delivery Hotline of Allegheny County as it delivers essential items to those without transportation options. Support small, Black Led Organizations (BLOs) by donating to the POISE Foundation’s Critical Community Needs Fund. The Incline, NEXTpittsburgh, Pittsburgh City Paper, Kidsburgh and PublicSource collaborated to build this resource. Email halle@publicsource.org with suggested additions to this list. This page was last updated on May 27, 2020. PublicSource has a special page dedicated to our reporting on COVID-19 for the Pittsburgh region. See it here and sign up for our newsletter to stay informed. We hope you are following the news and, if your situation allows, social distancing guidelines .  Have a tip or an idea? Please email mila@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI