Posted in Daily report , posts July 11, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 11, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Democratizing SAT prep Neighbors in Need is a nonprofit that provides scholarships to Pittsburgh Prep, a tutoring company. Together, they launched a free online SAT tutoring course . Now, the College Board has partnered with Khan Academy to do the same, in a push to make SAT prep available even to those who don’t have money to spend on private tutors. Southwest PA: Horse therapy horse for people with PTSD and disabilities Horses are among the best therapy animals because they’re responsive to human emotion and body language. Four farms in Southwestern Pennsylvania can help treat children with both physical and mental disabilities and at-risk children who’ve been abused. Nickers ‘n Neighs is also partial to help veterans overcome post-traumatic stress. Washington County: Donora drug bust The Washington County District Attorney arrested a 28-year-old man on charges of intent to deliver heroin, possession of heroin and possession of drug paraphernalia. Authorities confiscated 263 stamp bags of heroin. Reading: FBI search City Hall, continuing Allentown case The FBI moved to Reading, where they served warrants at the mayor’s office, city council, the finance department and controller, seeking documents related to contracts . The offices are cooperating. Mayor Vaughn Spencer used the same campaign consultant as Allentown Mayor Ed Pawlowski: H Street Industries. Philadelphia: Questions surrounding a ‘Good Samaritan’ case Does it count as self-defense when you shoot someone who may have committed a crime that you didn’t see? That’s what Hatboro Councilman George Forgeng did when he shot and wounded a bank robbery suspect. Forgeng didn’t see the crime, didn’t know whether the suspect was armed and only assumed guilt because of a broken dye pack outside the bank. Harrisburg: Couple caught having sex on federal building roof, including U.S. Marshal A photographer leaked photos of the couple on Wednesday, sending them to the news because she feared they could pose a security risk . At least one of the suspects is in the U.S. Marshals Service. The incident is currently under investigation. NATIONAL Office of Personnel director resigns After news regarding the scope of the cyber attack broke, Katherine Archuleta submitted her resignation to President Obama on Friday. The acting role will be filled by the former director of a consulting firm until a new, competent and technologically savvy replacement can step in to manage the crisis. Charleston shooter shouldn’t have been able to buy gun A loophole in the system allowed Dylann Roof, suspected Charleston, S.C., shooter, to purchase the handgun allegedly used for the murders. Roof tried to buy the gun but was denied because further investigation into his criminal history was needed. The FBI didn’t obtain the documents within the three-day waiting period, so Roof was able to return and buy the gun. Parole boards keep prisoners behind bars The U.S. has more than 1.5 million people incarcerated, and 26 states have nearly limitless authority to determine who stays there and why, and they don’t have to give reasons. Parole boards only release a fraction of prisoners because they don’t want those releases to haunt them. IN OTHER NEWS Toronto mourns, offers candlelight vigil for dead raccoon It started when a concerned citizen tweeted Animal Services to pick up the body of a dead raccoon . But despite repeated notices, it was left there for more than 10 hours. As the day progressed, more passersby stopped to honor the animal. People brought flowers, cards, a framed photograph and candles, and named him Conrad. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.