Posted in Daily report , posts May 5, 2015 by Alexandra Kanik May 11, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Bradford: Fracking chemicals discovered in drinking water A study published Monday by a team of Pennsylvania State University geoscientists found traces of 2-Butoxyethanol (2BE) in the water of three homes. They suspect the leak comes from a lack of integrity in the wells, rather than the actual fracking process. Pittsburgh: Records requested concerning Elizabeth Forward board president The Allegheny County District Attorney’s office has asked for Phil Martell’s expense reimbursement records from his former employers. West Mifflin police indicates Martell may have misappropriated funds while in the employ of West Mifflin School District and the Allegheny Intermediate Unit. Harrisburg: 311 call system implemented Yesterday, Harrisburg introduced the region’s first non-emergency phone line . Live people operate from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., and complaints can be made 24 hours a day on the city’s website. Allentown: Heroin bust Eleven Pennsylvanians were charged by the state Attorney General’s office and the Carbon County District Attorney’s office for trafficking $1.5 million worth of heroin over a period of four months. Harrisburg: State senator proposes $15 minimum wage Last week, Sen. Daylin Leach put his “One Fair Wage” bill into state Legislature, with the plan to raise minimum wage to a livable wage, eliminate the tip minimum wage and equate minimum wage to inflation. First 2016 electoral map The map puts Pennsylvania as “Leans Democratic,” and as things stand now the Democrats have the advantage in the electoral college. NEW FROM PUBLICSOURCE Halle Stockton, “People with speech disabilities, their advocates relieved by proposed policy” Jeffrey Benzing, “The high cost of keeping the elderly and dying in prison” Stephanie Roman, “‘The Zoe Post’ began the targeting of women in gaming” NATIONAL Huckabee contends for president Mike Huckabee, former pastor and governor of Arkansas, announced his candidacy for the Republican party on Tuesday. Obama nominates next chairman, vice-chairman of Joint Chiefs The nominations of Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr. and Gen. Paul J. Selva were announced yesterday. ISIS takes responsibility for Texas shooting Over a Syrian radio station managed by the Islamic State, the group claimed responsibility for the attack on the Dallas cartoon contest. U.S. officials still doubt the claim, believing the suspected gunmen were inspired by ISIS propaganda but were not members. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor IN OTHER NEWS Restoring Ali’s home Philadelphia lawyer George Bochetto partnered with Jared Weiss to help restore Muhammad Ali’s childhood home in Louisville. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.