Posted in On the beat , posts Politically-active nonprofits submit conflicting reports to government agencies by Natasha Khan August 1, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Some of the most well-known and politically active non-profit organizations may have incorrectly filled out their tax returns, according to The Center for Public Integrity. The center identified discrepancies when it compared the groups’ filings to the Internal Revenue Service and the Federal Election Commission. Some of the groups reported millions in political spending to the FEC, but very little to the IRS. The Center notes, “It’s a felony to ‘willfully’ file IRS tax returns containing fraudulent information.” As 501(c)(4) “social welfare” organizations under the IRS code, they can engage in some campaign activity as long as it’s not their primary purpose and they are not required to disclose the names of their donors. The first story focuses on the 60 Plus Association, a senior citizens’ group mostly funded by a network of organizations connected to billionaires Charles and David Koch that bills itself as a conservative alternative to the AARP. The Virginia-based organization told the Federal Election Commission that it spent about $4.6 million on political ads and “voter contact” phone calls endorsing or denouncing federal candidates during the three months prior to the 2012 election. But it reported spending a mere $35,000 on “direct and indirect political campaign activities” during its entire 2012 fiscal year to the Internal Revenue Service. The second story expanded on the idea of comparing FEC and IRS filings by examining other groups, such as Grover Norquist’s Americans for Tax Reform, the Club for Growth and Patriot Majority USA. Take, for instance, Americans for Tax Reform and Patriot Majority USA — ideologically opposed “social welfare” nonprofits that each unleashed a barrage of political attack ads ahead of the 2012 election. Both groups hired media buying firms and consultants to help execute their spending plans and produce advertisements, according to Federal Election Commission filings. But when the IRS asked each group how many independent contractors received more than $100,000 in compensation, both said “zero.” Some of the groups admitted their mistakes and plan to file amended tax returns. Since the stories were published, the watchdog organization Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics has filed a complaint with the IRS and is asking them to investigate whether the 60 Plus Association violated federal law. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Non-profits Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan