Posted in Inside our Newsroom Public Source interns mull the future of journalism, and their role in it The printing press may no longer hold the means to power and wealth, but interns at Pittsburgh’s Public Source see paths to a rewarding career in an evolving media landscape. by Jamie Wiggan August 2, 2025 August 2, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Clockwise from top left, Pittsburgh’s Public Source summer interns Caleb Kaufman, Hannah Johansson, Ember Duke, Femi Horrall, Yari Gonzalez and Ayla Saeed. (Photos by Stephanie Strasburg/Pittsburgh’s Public Source) As newsroom jobs plummet along with public trust in media , it’s a tough time to be eying a career in journalism. “No one goes into it, I think, unless they’re very passionate about it,” said Caleb Kaufman, a photo intern at Pittsburgh’s Public Source. “There are much easier fields to go into, with more opportunities, especially with entry-level jobs.” Public Source recruited six interns this summer to help tell and amplify local stories. Despite the leaner news media market, they want to find ways to make a living doing journalism down the decades. They say the rich and rewarding work, and the tug of public service, makes the pursuit worthwhile. Clockwise from left, Ayla Saeed, Ember Duke, Femi Horrall, Halle Stockton, Jamie Wiggan, Emma Folts, Quinn Glabicki and Caleb Kaufman talk about community reporting in the Pittsburgh’s Public Source newsroom on July 1, in Uptown. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) “I can’t just sit here and see everything happening in the world and not do anything about it,” said editorial intern Ember Duke. Challenges and opportunities It’s not all doom and gloom in the news business. The demise of legacy news creates space for new ventures – and, for our interns, a dose of excitement to offset the anxiety. Managing Editor Rich Lord recalls a time when the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette staffed a newsroom of 200. Stagnant pay and benefits cuts helped launch a strike that’s nearing the three-year mark. On the flipside, he said, smaller outlets, like Public Source, bring new approaches to storytelling and news gathering. Kaufman embraces this. “It seems like a lot of it is going toward smaller or even individual outlets. … You can find a really cool place to work,” he said. “I’ve been seeing more of these nonprofit newsrooms opening up that have more roots in the community.” Caleb Kaufman, right, Pittsburgh Public Source photo intern, photographs a protester in front of the Pittsburgh police as they block Forbes Avenue in Oakland during protests of President Donald Trump’s visit to neighboring Carnegie Mellon University, on July 15. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/Pittsburgh’s Public Source) Those organizations can build trust where legacy outlets have faltered, Kaufman said, if they demonstrate care and thoughtfulness in their reporting. Ayla Saeed, an editorial intern, has witnessed firsthand the challenges imposed by dwindling media confidence. During a recent effort to gauge perspectives on the record-setting weather on a muggy day at the Vintage Grand Prix, her inquiries yielded mostly first-name-only comments and lots of skepticism. Even questions about weather drew partisan reactions, she said, in an era during which “If you like this [given activity], then you’re on this side of the political spectrum.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Standing out from the crowd For those seeking a place in this narrowing — if diversifying — job pool, the pressure is on to stand out. “You have to be really savvy,” said Saeed, who is double-majoring in criminal justice to support a law school “backup plan” – a strategy shared by editorial intern Femi Horall. Hannah Johansson, an editorial intern and recent graduate of University of California Berkeley’s journalism masters program, recommends the graduate path for people seeking a career change or looking to develop an ambitious project idea, but not for every aspiring reporter. “I tried a few other things, mainly science,” Johansson said. “Then I realized, I really, really want to do journalism school.” As a student of information systems interning at Public Source, Yari Gonzalez is coming from the other direction. Though not necessarily aspiring to a career in journalism, her audience engagement internship has taught her valuable lessons to apply to other fields. There’s so much going on, but everything comes together to create a story and then it’s out there!” Gonzalez said. “It’s very interesting to see all of the teamwork that goes into it.” As our interns face the sometimes “terrifying” prospect of life after graduation, they’re meeting the challenge with determination and a smile. “Despite the uncertainty, a lot of the ways that the industry is changing do really excite me!” said Horrall. “A lot of my favorite reporting utilizes innovative storytelling techniques, and I love getting to experiment with them myself.” “I believe journalism will survive,” said Duke. “It has to. … People are more open to new methods of storytelling and are receptive.” Ember Duke Summer 2025 editorial intern Age: 22 Education: Duquesne University (graduated 2025). Majored in multiplatform journalism and digital media arts, with minors in philosophy and creative writing Dream job: “Becoming an investigative reporter, though I’m still exploring what topics I might like to report on. I also hope to someday be published in creative nonfiction and poetry, which are also central to my identity as a writer.” Femi Horrall Summer 2025 editorial intern Age: 20 Education: Northwestern University (expected 2027). Journalism and cognitive science, with a minor in data science Dream job: “I really enjoy investigative reporting with lots of visual elements, like data visualizations and illustrations, so my dream would be to do as much of that as possible!” Hannah Johansson Summer 2025 editorial intern Age: 24 Education: UC Berkeley Graduate School of Journalism (graduated 2025) Dream job: “I would love to make a living writing long-form magazine articles about extractive industry, the environment and labor.” Caleb Kaufman Summer 2025 photojournalism intern Age: 21 Education: Ithaca College (expected 2026). Film, photography, and visual arts major Dream job: “I would love to be a staff photographer at the Associated Press or Reuters and cover all kinds of photo stories.” Yari Gonzalez Summer 2025 audience data & analytics intern Age: 19 Education: Carnegie Mellon University (expected 2028). Information systems Dream job: “IT project manager, where I can improve the lives of others by leading collaborative, technology driven solutions that make a meaningful impact.” Ayla Saeed Summer 2025 editorial intern Age: 21 Education: University of Pittsburgh (expected 2026). Law, criminal justice and society with minor in media communications Dream job: “Investigative journalism! Conducting research and writing about groundbreaking info.” Jamie Wiggan is deputy editor at Pittsburgh’s Public Source and can be reached at jamie@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow Jamie Wiggan jamie@publicsource.org Jamie began his journalism career at a local news startup in McKees Rocks, where he learned the trade covering local school boards and municipalities, and left four years later as editor-in-chief. He comes... More by Jamie Wiggan