Posted in Election 2024 Live primary results: Summer Lee nominated to serve second term in Congress The progressive Democrat from Swissvale overcame a challenger who questioned her support of President Joe Biden amid party divisions over Israel’s war in Gaza. by Charlie Wolfson April 23, 2024 September 24, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X U.S. Rep. Summer Lee, D-Swissvale, arrives at her election night party on Tuesday, April 23, 2024, at the Renaissance Pittsburgh Hotel in Downtown. Lee won the District 12 Democratic primary over Edgewood Councilor Bhavini Patel. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) U.S. Rep. Summer Lee, a Swissvale Democrat, won the primary in the 12th Congressional District, turning back a challenge from Edgewood Borough Councilor Bhavini Patel in one of Pennsylvania’s most-watched elections. The Associated Press declared Lee the winner at 9:21 p.m. as she led with 59% of the vote. The contest between Lee and Patel cost millions of dollars , drew in supporters from across the country and involved policy issues including Israel’s war in Gaza and support for President Joe Biden’s re-election. Jump to a contest: Congress , president , state row offices , state House and Senate “Our campaign was built on a record of delivering for our democracy, defending our most fundamental rights, and expanding our vision for what is politically possible for our region’s most marginalized communities,” Lee said in a release put out by her campaign shortly after the race was called. Yvonne Owens, center bottom, of Homestead, and Marcella Lee-Wilson, right, of Rankin, celebrate at U.S. Rep. Summer Lee’s election night party on April 23. Owens is a cousin of Lee-Wilson, who is Lee’s grandmother. “She’s my cousin, but more importantly, she’s my congresswoman,” said Owens. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Lee will face Shadyside Republican James Hayes in the Nov. 5 General Election and she will be favored to win the Democratic-leaning district that encompasses Pittsburgh, some southern and eastern suburbs and part of Westmoreland County. Patel ran a campaign focused partly on her career and upbringing but also on criticisms of Lee’s first term in Congress — often accusing Lee of being insufficiently supportive of Biden. Her challenge attracted support from Jeffrey Yass , a conservative billionaire from the Philadelphia suburbs who typically supports Republican candidates, and who Patel denounced. Edgewood Councilor Bhavini Patel, right, speaks with campaign volunteer Eric Fussenegger, left, of Monroeville, at the Church of the Resurrection polling station in Monroeville on April 23. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Lee called her win “a rejection of right-wing interests and Republican billionaires using corporate Super PACs to target Black and brown Democrats in our primaries — be it [pro-Israel] AIPAC or [Yass-funded] Moderate PAC or any other MAGA billionaire in Democratic clothing.” Election 2024 In no-suspense presidential primaries, Allegheny County map shows weaknesses for both Trump and Biden Trump lagged in affluent suburbs while Biden lost ground in urban and lower-turnout areas. Lee has criticized Israel and its actions in Gaza, and at times  Biden’s policy toward Israel. Patel has been more supportive of the longtime U.S. ally and tried to use the issue as proof that Lee would jeopardize Biden’s strength heading into November — though Biden complimented Lee in a Pittsburgh visit last week and Lee said Tuesday she voted for him in the primary. Allegheny County Executive Sara Innamorato, left, cheers on U.S. Rep. Summer Lee, right, D-Swissvale, as Lee arrives at her election night party on Tuesday, April 23, 2024, at the Renaissance Pittsburgh Hotel in Downtown. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Outside a polling location early Tuesday, Patel said the region “deserves a leader where every voice is represented and every voice is reflected. … I think we can adopt socially progressive values while having mainstream Democratic voices. And bringing people into the party.” Congress In the 12th Congressional District, including most of Allegheny County and part of Westmoreland, Lee is running for renomination against Patel. James Hayes of Shadyside is running unopposed for the Republican nomination. In the 17th District, which includes parts of Allegheny and Beaver counties, there are no contested primaries. Incumbent Democrat Chris Deluzio of Aspinwall and Republican state Rep. Rob Mercuri of Pine are each unopposed. For U.S. Senate, Democratic incumbent Bob Casey and Republican challenger Dave McCormick are each unopposed in primaries. Election 2024 Democratic primary for Pittsburgh’s Congress seat flooded by money from afar, including conservative Yass The 12th District Democratic primary between incumbent Summer Lee and Bhavini Patel has attracted more than $1 million in outsider spending. Jump to a contest: Congress , president , state row offices , state House and Senate President President Joe Biden and former President Donald Trump have each already secured enough delegates to be their parties’ respective nominees. Each shares the Pennsylvania primary ballot with a candidate who has suspended their campaign. Some on the left are urging voters to use the write-in option to protest Biden’s stance on the war in Gaza. Jump to a contest: Congress , president , state row offices , state House and Senate Pennsylvania row offices Republicans occupy two of the three Pennsylvania row offices on the ballot. The office of attorney general is on the ballot for the first time since Gov. Josh Shapiro, a Democrat, resigned from the post to lead the state. Jump to a contest: Congress , president , state row offices , state House and Senate State legislature Most of Allegheny County’s legislative candidates are running unopposed in primaries. There are three state House seats with contested Democratic primaries and one state Senate seat with primary contests in both parties. To view results from districts with no contested primaries, visit the county website . Jump to a contest: Congress , president , state row offices , state House and Senate Democracy & Doubt Pittsburgh navigates trust and choice in the 2024 election season Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: 2024 election , Allegheny County , Election results , Elections , Pennsylvania , Pittsburgh Charlie Wolfson charlie@publicsource.org x Charlie Wolfson is an enterprise reporter for Pittsburgh's Public Source, focusing on local government accountability and politics in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. He was a Report for America corps... More by Charlie Wolfson