Posted in Daily report , posts Aug. 10, 2015 by Natasha Khan August 10, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pennsylvania will seek help on figuring out how to cut carbon emissions State officials have just 13 months (or possibly longer with an extinction) to design how Pennsylvania will reduce carbon dioxide emissions 34 percent by 2030, required under the recently announced Clean Power Plan. That’s sure to be a difficult task considering a state economy steeped in the coal, natural gas and nuclear energy industries. Officials have said they’ll be seeking help on coming up with a plan via public outreach, a major grid operator and possibly from other states. State Attorney General Kathleen Kane arraigned Saturday A preliminary hearing on State Attorney General Kathleen Kane’s charges of lying to a grand jury and leaking secret grand jury information is set for Aug. 24 at 1 p.m. in Montgomery County. Gov. Tom Wolf has called for Kane to resigned in the wake of the criminal charges. Greensburg: Mother and daughter caught shooting heroin in car with baby in back seat Police have charged a 43-year-old mother and her 23-year-old daughter with using heroin while they were parked at a gas pump and a 6-month-old baby boy sat in the backseat. Pittsburgh: Jerome Bettis inducted into NFL Hall of Fame Amid a sea of waving Terrible Towels and screaming fans, Jerome Bettis, or The Bus, was inducted into the into the Pro Football Hall of Fame Saturday night at Tom Benson Stadium. NATIONAL Shell severs ties with right-wing group ALEC over stance on climate change Because it still denies the science showing the existence of climate change, Shell said it will no longer support the American Legislation Exchange Council, a right-wing lobbying group. Fellow oil giant BP has also previously cut ties with the group for the same reason. Top U.S. scientists praise Iran Nuclear Deal Calling it “innovative and stringent” 29 of the nation’s top scientists, including some of the world’s top minds in the fields of nuclear weapons and arms control, said they support the agreement in a letter to President Obama. Ferguson, one year later Hundreds of people filled a street in Ferguson on Sunday in remembrance and to reflect on how the shooting death of 18-year-old Michael Brown by a white police officer changed the national debate over race and policing. Yellow mine water from Colorado reaches New Mexico Wastewater from a mine that’s been inactive since 1923 was accidentally released by a cleanup crew supervised by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. About 1 million gallons of wastewater began spilling into the Animas River on Wednesday and reached New Mexico over the weekend. IN OTHER NEWS Grizzly bear kills hiker in Yellowstone The man was found partially consumed and investigators identified what looked like defensive wounds on his arms. The daily report was compiled by Natasha Khan, a PublicSource reporter. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at nkhan@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan