Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 25, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 25, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Point Park part-time faculty reach tentative contract with administration Point Park University and the United Steelworkers (USW) reached a tentative agreement that will support 300 part-time faculty jobs. Adjunct professors voted to join USW in June 2014, and negotiations began nearly 10 months ago. If ratified, the contract will provide adjuncts and part-time faculty with job security and an unidentified wage increase. Pittsburgh: Longtime producers amongst those laid off at WQED Among the 12 staff members reportedly affected by the Thursday morning lay offs were WQED multimedia producers and on-air hosts Michael Bartley and Tonia Caruso. Bartley accepted the Mid-Atlantic Emmy award for WQED “station excellence” just last Saturday in Philadelphia. Allegheny County: Concerns over rabies Two kittens scratched members of a family in Wilmerding and later tested positive for rabies , according to the Allegheny County Health Department. Eleven animals were reported rabid this year in Allegheny County, and the health department warned people Thursday not to feed any stray animals in the area. Philadelphia: Former QVC manager charged for bogus invoice scheme The Philadelphia U.S. Attorney charged Douglas S. Rae, former lighting manager at QVC, for allegedly leading a $1.8 million bogus invoice scheme between 2006 and 2013. Rae faces 20 years in prison and an $8.7 million fine. His charges include mail fraud, wire fraud, conspiracy to commit wire fraud and money laundering. Lancaster County: New DUI court system Lancaster County will handle cases involving driving under the influence differently in hopes that it will save time and taxpayer money. The court will take place twice a month on Thursdays to handle most, if not all, DUI-related crimes, which are one of the most common in the county. National Pope promotes action on immigration to Congress Pope Francis, the first pope to address a joint meeting of Congress , urged Americans Thursday to embrace immigrants from around the world. In his speech, the pope discussed the refugee crises and the magnitude of the issue. Obama and Putin to meet for first time in nearly a year Amidst troubled relations between the two, President Barack Obama and Russian President Vladimir Putin are scheduled to meet in New York Monday. Obesity epidemic varies between ethnic groups The country’s obesity epidemic continues, and maps provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reveal the disparity among different ethnic groups. Blacks are hit hardest by obesity, followed by Hispanics. World Stampede kills more than 700 at Hajj pilgrimage More than 700 are dead and at least 850 are injured after a stampede at the annual Islamic Pilgrimage to Mecca , and the numbers are still climbing. The stampede occurred Thursday morning in the city of Mina , two miles outside of Mecca, and the injured were transferred to four different hospitals within the region. In Other News Lancaster County one of top pumpkin producers in the nation Lancaster County rings in at No. 8 in the top 10 pumpkin-producing counties in the U.S., recording more than 1,000 acres of pumpkins in the 2012 season. Pumpkin growing is spread out across the country, and the Washington Post provided the total acres of pumpkins harvested by county. The daily report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI