Posted in Environment , In the balance: PA Supreme Court 2015 , On the beat , posts Green groups make first endorsements for PA Supreme Court candidates by Natasha Khan October 14, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Four Pennsylvania environmental groups have decided to do something they’ve never done before … they’re endorsing candidates for the state Supreme Court. Clean Water Action, the Pennsylvania chapter of the Sierra Club, Penn Environment and Conservation Voters of PA announced that they’re backing three Democratic candidates because they could potentially support future environmental cases. The groups are hoping their members, which number in the hundreds of thousands, will help vote in who they see as pro-environmental candidates. Judicial elections have notoriously low voter turnout. “The Pennsylvania Supreme Court has played an increasing role in environmental protection and voting rights,” Steve Hvozdovich of Clean Water Action said in a statement . “We are making endorsements in a statewide judicial election for the first time because the future of the Supreme Court will be determined by this single election.” The groups are endorsing the three Democratic candidates running: Philadelphia County Court of Common Pleas Judge Kevin Dougherty, Superior Court Judge Christine Donohue and Superior Court Judge David Wecht. With elections less than three weeks away, on Nov. 3, the candidates will square off against three Republican candidates and an independent. The election will determine the political makeup of the court for many years. The justices who will remain are two Democrats and two Republicans, and three new justices will be elected. “The next court may steer Pennsylvania’s future on crucial issues like climate change, fracking pipelines, and public health,” said David Masur, of PennEnvironment, in a statement. “As the legislature accelerates its attacks on environmental protection, the Supreme Court must be a bulwark of good government, ethics, and prudence.” From StateImpact Pennsylvania : The court is expected to hear cases connected to its December 2013 Robinson Township ruling in which it struck down parts of Act 13, the state’s wide-ranging law on gas drilling, on the grounds that they violated the constitution’s Environmental Rights Amendment, under which government has a responsibility to maintain environmental quality for its citizens. “The Robinson Township decision showed the impact that this court can have on environmental protection,” said Josh McNeil, Executive Director of Conservation Voters of Pennsylvania, [during a call with reporters.] Masur, of PennEnvironment, predicts that the future court will also likely hear legal challenges to Pennsylvania’s plan to implement the federal Clean Power Plan, which requires states to make steep cuts to carbon dioxide emissions. The plan is due to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in 2016. To learn more about the PA Supreme Court, follow our coverage of the race each Tuesday and Thursday leading up to the Nov. 3 election. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan