Posted in Daily report , posts July 9, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 9, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Allentown: Developments in the City Hall search No specific targets have been named, and the nature of the investigation has not been revealed. But experts say it’s likely that FBI agents have proved probable cause. Mayor Ed Pawlowski suspended his campaign Monday, and on Wednesday, moving trucks were photographed outside the house of Pawlowski’s campaign manager, Mike Fleck. Pittsburgh: Some goats in your backyard A new City Council ordinance lowered the fees for urban farmers to obtain permits to keep chickens, goats and beehives. The process is also expedited from 10 to 12 weeks to a single day. Fresh eggs, anyone? Washington County: Shady business park land deals Mylan NV, a generic drug company, bought land from its vice chairman’s business partner for $1 a day. Mylan built headquarters there, effectively becoming both the buyer and seller of the property. The company was supposed to inform its investors about the transactions, but never did. Philadelphia: When the mayoral race isn’t a race at all Philadelphia hasn’t elected a Republican mayor since Bernard Samuel in 1947. Democrats outnumber Republicans about 7 to 1 in the city. Yet the Republican nominee, Melissa Bailey, works hard to keep things competitive, and wants to add some variety to politics. Harrisburg: Attorney General’s suspension policy Attorney General Kathleen Kane adopted a policy that requires employees charged with felonies in her office to be suspended without pay . Yet if Kane, currently under criminal investigation, is charged, she won’t suspend herself — she’s an elected official, not an employee. Harrisburg: Harsher penalties for doctor impersonators Although only eight people in the last five years have been convicted of falsifying their credentials, lawmakers agreed to make the terms for impersonating licensed medical professionals more strict, with a maximum of five years in prison and a $10,000 fine. NATIONAL Halt on the New York Stock Exchange On Wednesday morning, the stock exchange shut down . New York Stock Exchange stocks continued trading on other exchanges, including Nasdaq. As of Wednesday afternoon, the reasons for the malfunction remain unclear. Computer glitch grounds United Airlines Also on Wednesday morning, a network connectivity issue grounded 4,900 United Airlines flights worldwide. When planes landed, gates were unable to open to receive passengers, so many people were inconvenienced by missing connections. Washington Redskins forced to cancel trademark The battle against the NFL team’s name finally gained some traction. A federal judge ordered the team to cancel the brand’s trademark, but the Redskins are likely to appeal the decision. WORLD Greece requests new loan Greece submitted a request to the European Union for a new three-year loan . Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras has until the end of the week to send in credible, concrete reform proposals. IN OTHER NEWS A furry invasion Today, Anthrocon kicks off in Pittsburgh at the David L. Lawrence Convention Center, so those who work downtown could spot a few furry friends out on the prowl. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.