Posted in Equity , TRUMP'S FIRST 100 DAYS , VIDEO Pittsburgh students answer, “America would be a friendlier country if…” by Ryan Loew April 4, 2017 May 30, 2019 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X How can the United States be a friendlier country? That is the question we asked students of Allderdice High School in Squirrel Hill. What they said, you can watch in this video; if you’d like to know how the idea came together, read on. Two weeks ago, PublicSource — at the invitation of the Global Minds Initiative and Change Agency — joined a group discussion at the high school on immigrant integration efforts and what it’s like to be an immigrant, a Muslim or a person of color in Pittsburgh. Students had a lot to share. They cited education, awareness and speaking up against hate and violence as key to a safer and more tolerant environment. We talked about the importance of storytelling and showed our recent video on the type of hate mail Pittsburgh’s Muslim neighbors are receiving and how they respond. At the end, we asked the students what they thought of the video and how they could make their communities more welcoming. One young woman urged the class to not judge Muslims based on the media coverage. “Ask me. I can tell you what Islam is about.” Special thanks to Peyton Klein of the Global Minds Initiative and Betty Cruz of the Change Agency for inviting PublicSource to engage with the students. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Donald Trump , education , Pittsburgh , President Trump Ryan Loew ryan@publicsource.org x Ryan is a PublicSource visual producer/storyteller. He joined PublicSource after being a freelance producer of news features and documentary stories in the Pittsburgh region and beyond. His work appeared... More by Ryan Loew