Posted in Aftermath: Synagogue attack , Community storytelling , Featured , FIRST PERSON , PUBLIC SAFETY Violence will not stop me. I will wear my necklace with its Jewish star, proudly and unafraid. by Valerie Bacharach October 29, 2018 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Valerie Bacharach is a writer based in Pittsburgh. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Compelling personal stories told by the people living them. I am a Jewish woman living in the Point Breeze neighborhood of Pittsburgh. I am a wife, a mother, a writer. I am a member of Rodef Shalom Congregation. I am a member of Carlow University’s Madwomen in the Attic and a volunteer at two halfway houses for women. And now, I sit at my desk trying to make sense of the senseless and find words to describe what is indescribable. How do you talk when there is no language for this grief? I go to Squirrel Hill almost every day, have coffee, browse bookstores, write in the library, meet friends for lunch. I drive past Tree of Life almost every day, on my way to Oakland or Shadyside, Bloomfield or the Strip. I didn’t grow up in Pittsburgh. I’m a transplant from the flat land of Columbus, Ohio. But my husband grew up in Point Breeze and attended Sterrett and Allderdice. Our son lives in Lawrenceville; we have nieces and nephews living in a 2-mile radius. I love Pittsburgh, its rivers and bridges, its crazy streets that arc and bend, never a straight line. I love this city’s vibrancy, its neighborhoods, its open arms and big heart. But what happened this weekend is an abomination. A sacred space, a sanctuary, desecrated. Eleven people dead in the midst of saying prayers, of honoring Shabbat, of hearing Torah. Eleven people whose deaths should have come with gentleness, who should have had a peaceful crossing from this world to the World to Come. “…Pittsburgh has strong arms, wide enough to embrace us all, and we will provide solace and love for each other,” writes Valerie Bacharach. “We will not be afraid.” (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) My 37-year-old son called to check on me Saturday evening and see how I am doing. This son who had a bar mitzvah, comes with me to synagogue only on High Holy days or to say Mourners’ Kaddish for his grandparents and younger brother. He identifies as Jewish, but doesn’t really believe. And yet he tells me that what he wants to do now is go to services, be with the congregation and show his support. I often struggle with my own faith, what I believe about God, but I understand my son’s feelings. We both want to be present, to be a part of our Jewish community and to stand together as we pray. I cannot fathom how someone can be so filled with hate, how a stranger wanted people dead simply for being Jewish. I am heartsick, angry, grieving. Unable to concentrate, to sit for very long. I pace the rooms of my house, move from window to window, watch the clouds. I attended the interfaith vigil Sunday evening at Soldiers and Sailors, sat among the crowd of people of every race and religious belief— And I am not afraid. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting I will go to services, wear my necklace with its Jewish star, mourn with others, cry with others, and yes, hopefully, laugh with others. Because Pittsburgh has strong arms, wide enough to embrace us all, and we will provide solace and love for each other. We will not be afraid. Valerie Bacharach is a writer based in Pittsburgh. She can be reached at v_bacharach@hotmail.com . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram