Republishing guidelines Pittsburgh’s Public Source is a collaborative newsroom. We make our journalism available to you and to media partners because we believe informed and engaged citizens will make decisions that improve our region. Other media outlets are welcome to publish select Public Source stories, marked by a “Republish this story” button at the bottom of the story page. When that button is clicked, you will gain access to our guidelines and html code that helps to easily copy the content, including photos and code that allows us to track the story’s reach. It’s important that you use the code provided to meet the conditions set. Please also ensure that you: Give us credit, in this format: “by [Author Name(s)], Pittsburgh’s Public Source”. Include a line at the top of the story that reads: “Pittsburgh’s Public Source is an independent nonprofit newsroom serving the Pittsburgh region. Sign up for our free newsletters. ” Let us know when you use our work by sending an email to rich@publicsource.org . Send any additional questions you have to Editor-in-Chief Halle Stockton at halle@publicsource.org . Additional guidelines: Our material cannot be edited except to reflect changes in time, location and editorial style. You must not resell the story or sell ads against the story. It’s fine to publish the story on a page that’s surrounded by previously sold ads, however. We cannot grant permission to republish media created by our partner publications or that we license from third parties. Please exclude our work from being published or syndicated to third-party platforms or apps like Newsbreak under your publication name. Please tag PublicSource when sharing our stories as posts on your social media. Facebook Twitter Instagram You cannot republish our content wholesale or automatically. Select stories may be republished individually. You have no rights to sell our stories to any third parties or represent yourself as an authorized owner or representative of our material. You may not put our stories behind a paywall. Public Source does not allow reprints of our images free of charge beyond news outlets following the above republishing guidelines. To license a one-time reprint of an image, the rights of which belong to Public Source, there is a charge of $200 per photo. Contact info@publicsource.org with questions and requests. Thank you for supporting our work. (Updated May 2024) About Public Source About Newsletters Contact us Send tips & ideas Advertise with us Donate Membership FAQs Republishing guidelines Our partners Board of Directors Jobs Working with us