Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 2, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 2, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Boeing to invest $7.5 in Carnegie Mellon research lab Carnegie Mellon University is forming a new analytics lab with $7.5 million over three years  from The Boeing Company. The research lab will help Boeing analyze data from the sensors on their airplanes and defense technologies to help their design of modern airplanes. Pittsburgh: Highmark set to cut premiums Highmark will cut the price on seven of its nine Medicare Advantage plans in Western Pennsylvania next year, according to Highmark Vice President Tim Lightner. In 2015, the insurer raised prices. Harrisburg: Kane faces charges yet again Attorney General Kathleen Kane faces a new perjury charge filed  by the Montgomery County District Attorney. Detectives recovered a 2013 signed secrecy oath in Kane’s office after she testified in November that she was under no secrecy obligation. State College: Penn State could lose a piece of history Pennsylvania State University officials are looking to either renovate or replace Beaver Stadium , where its football team plays, in the next 10 years. The University hired an architect to propose improvement plans for 18 of its athletic facilities. Statewide: Bill aims to help young people with disabilities A bill passed by the Pennsylvania House aims to prepare disabled students for entering the job market post-graduation.The “Work Experience for High School Students with Disabilities Act” would require education officials and state agencies to work together for job placements for the high school students. NATIONAL Casualties at Oregon community college A number of people were killed and others injured in a shooting at Oregon’s Umpqua Community College . Investigators were analyzing social media posts made by the shooter, who was killed by police, but the number of deaths could not be confirmed late Thursday. Hurricane Joaquin could hit U.S. The track for Hurricane Joaquin has shifted but still threatens the East Coast with severe flooding. The storm, now a Category 3 hurricane, powered through the Bahamas Thursday with winds up to 125 mph. Blurred line in NYPD definition of excessive force The New York Police Department fails to give their officers a clear definition of “excessive force,” according to a report released Thursday by Inspector General Philip Eure. The report prohibits excessive force but does not clari guidelines. More Cosby allegations surface After years of silence, three more women came forward on Wednesday accusing comedian Bill Cosby of inappropriate behavior. More than 40 women have accused him of sexual misconduct in the past 40 years, but he has not been criminally charged. IN OTHER NEWS Exposing infants to allergens could be beneficial Instead of parents baby-proofing their homes to keep their children away from common allergens such as peanuts and pet dander, growing evidence says that exposing them early on to them could prevent allergies altogether. The daily report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI