Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan May 15, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been at least six train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. After the deadly Amtrak crash in Philadelphia on Tuesday, reporters tried to find out if the accident occurred near oil tank cars on an adjacent track. After hours of speculation, a spokesman for Conrail, the company that owns the yard where the tankers reside, made a statement that there was no crude oil in the cars. But PublicSource and StateImpact Pennsylvania posed the question: What if there had been? No crude oil in tank cars near Amtrak crash … but what if there had been? In an anticipated move, the U.S. oil industry filed a court challenge against new rules recently announced by federal regulators to improve crude-by-rail safety. The industry wants more time to retrofit and replace tank cars that have been involved in several recent fiery train accidents across North America and for a court to throw out new requirements for advanced braking systems, according to the Associated Press. Oil industry challenges rules meant to stop train explosions. And shortly after the oil industry challenged the rules, environmental groups also filed suit opposing them. Earthjustice and other groups say the new regulations fail to protect Americans from dangerous crude-oil trains by allowing unsafe tankers to remain on the tracks for far too long, according to The Huffington Post . Environmental groups sue over oil train rules, cite Amtrak crash. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan