Posted in On the beat , posts Philly train derailment by Natasha Khan May 13, 2015 June 12, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X More details are flooding in about the deadly Amtrak train crash in Philadelphia. At least seven people were killed and more than 200 injured. Federal safety officials confirmed that the train was moving at more than 100 mph, which is double the speed limit allowed on those tracks. Here’s some additional information on the crash: Gov. Wolf: “There was a row of [oil] tank cars near the crash site, and that is a cause for additional concern.” #Amtrak — Jessica S. Parks (@JS_Parks) May 13, 2015 After visiting the scene, Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Wolf said the Amtrak 188 train had derailed near a row of tanker cars, which he said was “a cause of additional concern,” according to Philly.com . Jeff Sheridan, the governor’s spokesman, referred questions about the tank cars to Philadelphia city officials. A source within Philadelphia’s city government said two of the tank cars the governor referred to contained non-flammable lubricant and two of the cars were empty. The person said the cars did not contain crude oil. Amtrak had nine derailments in the first two months of this year, according to the U.S. Federal Railroad Administration (FRA). Here’s a graph of their data covering from 2000 to 2014. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Here are the deaths from all accidents or incidents involving Amtrak trains, which can include pedestrians or people adjacent to train tracks as well as train passengers. This is also from the Federal Railroad Administration. You can also explore our spreadsheets that compare the number of accidents per million miles by train company and the number of accident deaths by company from 2000 to 2014. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan