Posted in Daily report , posts May 20, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 20, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Good morning. Here’s the news you need to know. PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: The State of Downtown Pittsburgh report The Pittsburgh Downtown Partnership released its fourth annual report detailing the growth and vibrancy of the city. Among other statistics, in four years, the downtown population increased 13 percent. Harrisburg: The trajectory of Attorney General Kathleen Kane When Kathleen Kane took office in 2013, she had the bravado to convert the stagnated position dominated by Republican men into something different. But critics say a string of irrational decisions and an obsession with another elite prosecutor ended up derailing her. Allentown: 20-year-old math genius graduates with three degrees Matthew Kilgore , who has spinal muscular atrophy and uses a wheelchair, graduated from Lehigh University with bachelor’s degrees in math and computer science and a master’s in math. He said he’s ready to take on another degree, a doctorate from MIT. Statewide: Gov. Tom Wolf appeals train companies On Tuesday, Gov. Wolf sent letters to Norfolk Southern Railway and CSX Transportation, recommending four safety features utilized by BNSF Railway in the Pacific Northwest, and also referenced the Department of Transportation’s final rule regarding transportation of flammable liquids. Statewide: Overlooked rural roads In Pennsylvania, 18 percent of rural roads are in poor condition and 25 percent of rural bridges are deficient, according to a report by TRIP. NATIONAL Six Chinese men indicted for economic espionage against the U.S. The defendants are alleged to have stolen cell phone microchip technology from two companies, Avago Technologies and Skyworks Solutions, and then selling it to Chinese military and commercial customers. Los Angeles to raise minimum wage to $15 On Tuesday, the L.A. city council voted to raise the minimum wage from $9 to $15 an hour by 2020. Los Angeles is the largest U.S. city to adopt the law. Update on Hillary Clinton’s emails On Tuesday, Clinton and the State Department assured everyone that they aren’t delaying the release of her private emails. There are 12 full-time State Department staffers sifting through 55,000 pages, and Clinton said she has no control over the timetable or release. Wage abuse abounds in N.Y. It’s not just nail salons: In 2013, New York City had $125 million in unpaid orders for wage reimbursements . Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced Monday that he plans to institute new rules for wage protection and health precautions. IN OTHER NEWS 3-D printed human skin It sounds horribly macabre, but it’s actually a good thing — rather than test products on animals, L’Oreal is partnering with Organovo to develop faux human skin for experiments. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.