What does hate look like? A guide to symbols used by hate groups in PA. By Matt Stroud Aug. 29, 2018 A photo taken at the Unite the Right Rally in Charlottesville on August 12, 2017. (Photo by Rodney Dunning/ flickr ) The day after a group of six people allegedly shouted racial slurs at Avalon resident Paul Morris and attacked him in a bar, his friends scoured Facebook for profiles connected to his assailants. They discovered an emblem that seemed to unite the six people: a keystone symbol surrounding an outline of a pitbull’s head. That symbol — which they recognized from shirts and vests worn by the group the night of the July attack — represents Keystone United, a white nationalist group formerly known as the Keystone State Skinheads. They realized then that this wasn’t merely six racist individuals who attacked Morris; it was an attack connected to an avowedly racist organization. There are more than 30 hate groups operating in Pennsylvania , according to the Southern Poverty Law Center [SPLC]. After the alleged hate-based attack in Avalon, PublicSource offers this list of symbols that represent hate groups in the state. We’re providing this information to bring awareness to the general public, so that you are aware of your surroundings, alert to symbols that may suggest you aren’t safe and to help ensure you are not caught off guard by tokens of hatred. Here are some of the symbols that represent hate in Pennsylvania. Select a group American Defense Records American Family Association American Freedom Union American Guard Aryan Strikeforce Asatru Folk Assembly Be Active Front USA Blood and Honour Social Club Committee for Open Debate on the Holocaust Counter.Fund Crew 38 (Hammerskin Nation) The Daily Stormer H.L. Mencken Club Identity Evropa Israelite Church of God in Jesus Christ Israelite School of Universal Practical Knowledge Israel United In Christ Keystone United Ku Klux Klan Nation of Islam National Socialist Liberation Front National Socialist Movement Poker Face Reformation-Bible Puritan-Baptist Church/Vatican Assassins The Right Stuff The Shoebat Foundation Vanguard America American Defense Records Ideology: Hate Founded: Late 2004 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Pittsburgh, Statewide Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Pittsburgher Travis David Condor runs this hate-fueled record label from his Sharpsburg apartment. ↑ Back to top American Family Association Ideology: Anti-LGBT Founded: 1977 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Franklin Prominent figures: Founders Tim Wildmon and Bryan Fischer . ↑ Back to top American Freedom Union Ideology: White Nationalist Founded: Late 1985 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Hampton Township Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Don Wassall, an Allison Park resident, has run the American Nationalist Union and The Nationalist Times since 1985. He campaigned for former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke's 1988 presidential campaign, according to SPLC. ↑ Back to top American Guard Ideology: White Supremacy Founded: 2016 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Statewide Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Unknown ↑ Back to top Aryan Strikeforce Ideology: Racist Skinhead Founded: 2013 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Statewide Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Aryan Strikeforce chaplain Jacob “Boots” Robards and Aryan Strikeforce President Henry Baird, both of Pennsylvania, have been indicted in an FBI sting for racketeering and distributing guns and drugs across state lines. Members of the group also allegedly conceived a suicide bombing at a Harrisburg counter-protest in October 2016; federal authorities intervened before the attack could be carried out. ↑ Back to top Asatru Folk Assembly Ideology: Neo-Völkisch (a group that worships the Norse or Germanic gods, “spirituality premised on the survival of white Europeans,” according to SPLC ) Founded: 1994 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Statewide Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Patricia Hall, the group’s statewide coordinator . ↑ Back to top Be Active Front USA Ideology: Racist Skinhead Founded: 2013 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Philadelphia Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Unknown ↑ Back to top Blood and Honour Social Club Ideology: Racist Skinhead Founded: 1987 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Statewide Prominent figures: Kevin Kislingbury, Ohio property owner who brought together leaders of Ohio and Pennsylvania-based skinhead groups to found the Blood and Honour Social Club and who runs the skinhead record label, ISD Records . ↑ Back to top Committee for Open Debate on the Holocaust Ideology: Holocaust Denial Founded: 1987 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: York Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Unknown ↑ Back to top Counter.Fund Ideology: White Nationalist Founded: 2017 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Huntington Mills Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Former Business Insider Chief Technology Officer Pax Dickinson . ↑ Back to top Crew 38 (Hammerskin Nation) Ideology: Racist Skinhead Founded: 1980s Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Statewide Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Unknown ↑ Back to top The Daily Stormer Ideology: Alt-Right Neo-Nazi Founded: 2013 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Statewide Prominent figures: Andrew Anglin , the website’s founder, an Ohioan who has taken an interest in Pennsylvania . ↑ Back to top H.L. Mencken Club Ideology: White Nationalist Founded: 2008 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Elizabethtown Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Founder Paul Gottfried is a professor emeritus of humanities at Elizabethtown College . ↑ Back to top Identity Evropa Ideology: White Nationalist Founded: 2016 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Statewide Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: From Reading, Elliott Kline (aka Eli Mosley) is Identity Evropa’s figurehead and leader , who helped to organize the 2017 Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville. Identity Evropa is one of the most active hate groups on college campuses in Pennsylvania , according to the Anti-Defamation League. ↑ Back to top Israelite Church of God in Jesus Christ Ideology: Black Nationalist Founded: 2000 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Allentown Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Unknown ↑ Back to top Israelite School of Universal Practical Knowledge Ideology: Black Nationalist Founded: 2004 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Philadelphia Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Unknown ↑ Back to top Israel United In Christ Ideology: Black Nationalist Founded: 2003 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Pittsburgh Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Unknown ↑ Back to top Keystone United (changed from “Keystone State Skinheads” in 2009) Ideology: White Nationalist, Racist Skinhead Founded: 2001 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Eastern Pennsylvania, Harrisburg area, Pittsburgh area Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Steve Smith , Republican committeeman in Luzerne County. Keystone United is alleged to have been linked to a July 7, 2018, assault of a black man in Avalon, Pa. ↑ Back to top Ku Klux Klan (including the United Klans of America) Ideology: General Hate Founded: 1865 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Statewide, Waynesboro and Eastern Pa. Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Unknown ↑ Back to top Nation of Islam Ideology: Black Nationalist Founded: 1930 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Wilkinsburg, Harrisburg, Philadelphia ↑ Back to top National Socialist Liberation Front Ideology: Neo-Nazi Founded: 1969 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Statewide Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Group is likely inactive , according to the Terrorism Research and Analysis Consortium. ↑ Back to top National Socialist Movement Ideology: Neo-Nazi Founded: 1974 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Statewide Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Founder Jeff Schoep has rallied with the group in Harrisburg. ↑ Back to top Poker Face Ideology: Hate Music Founded: 1990s Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Allentown Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Paul Topete, “ Body Worker, Healer ,” lead hate singer. ↑ Back to top Vatican Assassins Ideology: General Hate Founded: 2011 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Newmanstown Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: Talk hate radio host Eric Jon Phelps , whose Vatican Assassins tome serves as the basis for much of Phelps’ white purity gospel. ↑ Back to top The Right Stuff Ideology: White Nationalist Founded: 2012 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Pittsburgh Prominent figures: Right Stuff founder Michael "Enoch" Peinovich is a vehement anti-Semite and host of the Daily Shoah, a prominent podcast of the alt-right movement. ↑ Back to top The Shoebat Foundation Ideology: Anti-Muslim Founded: 2012 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Newtown Prominent figures in Pennsylvania: SPLC describes Walid Shoebat, this group’s founder, as “an extremist on the fringes of the anti-Muslim movement due to his outlandish conspiracy theories...” ↑ Back to top Vanguard America Ideology: Neo-Nazi Founded: 2015 Concentrations in Pennsylvania: Statewide Prominent figures: Dillon Irizarry, a Marine Corps veteran, leads the group. It’s been alleged that James Alex Fields Jr. was a member of Vanguard America ; he’s the man who drove a 2010 Dodge Challenger into a group of counter-protestors in Charlottesville, killing 32-year-old Heather Heyer. ↑ Back to top Correction (8/29/2018): A previous version of this article named a member of a group that the Southern Poverty Law Center identifies as a hate group. However, the member has denounced the hateful aspects that got the group on the SPLC list. The article has been corrected. Help us create a database of hate incidents in the Pittsburgh region. Tell us your story by filling out this form . Matt Stroud is a freelance reporter in Pittsburgh. He can be reached at matt@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @mattstroud . This story was fact-checked by Maria Rose. Web design and development by Natasha Vicens. Sign up here for PublicSource's weekly digest of stories.