Posted in Environment Who monitors Shell’s cracker plant — and how? The DEP makes its case The company will play an important role in tracking the emissions from its new Beaver County petrochemical facility, but the state Department of Environmental Protection pledges to be deeply involved, and promises to look into all citizen complaints. by Quinn Glabicki and Rich Lord November 7, 2022 December 13, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Shell's new ethane cracker plant sits along the southern shore of the Ohio River in Potter Township on Oct. 25. It converts ethane from natural gas to plastics. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) PublicSource asked the state Department of Environmental Protection about its plans for monitoring Shell’s new Potter Township petrochemical cracker. Here are the basics, per DEP Community Relations Coordinator Lauren Camarda. Shell is required to monitor the plant’s emissions daily, according to Camarda. The company must also report all emergencies and malfunctions that add to emissions and fix leaking pipes, valves and other components. If Shell doesn’t fulfill its responsibilities, it could face legal sanctions. The company’s pollution monitoring equipment must be tested and calibrated by a third party, and the data supplied to DEP, which reviews and approves them. Read more: Beaver County citizen scientists prepare to hold Shell to account That said, the agency won’t rely on the company. “DEP expects that its representatives will frequently be on site at the Shell facility to evaluate air quality,” according to Camarda. Federal guidance allows DEP to take as much as three years to complete full compliance inspections of facilities the size of the cracker plant, as long as it conducts frequent on-site “partial compliance evaluation” visits, she wrote. DEP already has air monitoring stations in Beaver Falls, Beaver Valley, Brighton Township, Hookstown, Potter Township and Vanport, and plans to place one in Beaver Borough. The agency monitors for pollutants listed in the federal Environmental Protection Agency’s National Ambient Air Quality Standards and some monitors also capture air toxics and volatile organic compounds. Data from DEP monitors statewide is available here . Read more: Is the air I’m breathing safe? How do I know the air quality where I live? Where do average citizens fit in? DEP responds to every complaint it receives, but won’t necessarily see something posted on social media. The agency urges citizens who see environmental concerns or pollution events to capture the date, time, location and description, plus photos or video if possible, and promptly call the regional office at 412-442-4000, use the toll-free number 866-255-5158 or report via its website . Complaints, she wrote, “may also result in partial inspections, and DEP has the authority to physically inspect the facility at any time,” or to demand Shell’s records. While DEP is aware of “increased interest” in citizen data collection, it must follow state and federal rules when pursuing enforcement actions, and those require “rigorous quality assurance/quality control requirements,” according to Camarda. The agency is also awaiting findings from a variety of federal citizen science initiatives. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Quinn Glabicki is the environment and climate reporter at PublicSource and a Report for America corps member. He can be reached at quinn@publicsource.org and on twitter and instagram @quinnglabicki. Rich Lord is PublicSource’s managing editor. He can be reached at rich@publicsource.org or on Twitter @richelord . Read more: Which buildings in Pittsburgh emit the most greenhouse gases? See how they compare. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: air pollution , leadstorynoshow , pollution , Shell , water pollution Quinn Glabicki quinnglabicki@gmail.com Quinn Glabicki is a writer and photographer covering climate and environment for Pittsburgh's Public Source. He is also a Report for America corps member. Quinn uses visual and written mediums to tell... More by Quinn Glabicki Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord