Posted in Daily report , posts The Daily Report: Sept. 28 2015 by Natasha Khan September 28, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Sept. 28, 2015 PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: UPMC reopens transplant program UPMC is reopening its organ transplant program after reviews by the state department of health and the CDC. The health department told the hospital it must submit a plan to improve infection and mold control, although the agency didn’t say if mold was what caused the deaths or if a source of mold had been found. Pittsburgh: And the Kane saga continues… Pennsylvania Attorney General Kathleen Kane’s law license could still be in jeopardy even if she is acquitted of criminal charges, law experts said . Philadelphia: Pope says farewell in Philadelphia Thousands gathered in the City of Brotherly Love to experience Pope Francis give an open-air mass, which concluded his six-day visit to the U.S. and Cuba. He was the first pope to ever visit the U.S. National Russia’s surprise accord To the surprise of the U.S. Russia has reached an agreement with governments in Syria, Iraq and Iran to share information about the Islamic State. TSA finds record number of firearms on carry on luggage TSA agents found a record 67 firearms in carry on luggage intended to go onto planes in the week ending September 17. Fifty-six of the 67 were loaded guns and 26 had a round in the chamber. Aspirin may help cancer patients According to a new study patients with cancers affected the gastrointestinal tract who took a daily Aspirin pill were twice as likely to be alive four years later compared to those who didn’t consume a pill. Researchers in the Netherlands studied 14,000 cancer patients. In Other News Fracking TV drama premieres Don Johnson plays a “ruthless” oil baron operating in the shale oil fields of North Dakota. The daily report was compiled by Natasha Khan a PublicSource reporter. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at nkhan@publicsource.org. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan