Posted in DEVELOP PGH , Economy & Housing , Local Government , On the beat , posts Peduto discusses Pittsburgh’s uneven development by Elizabeth Lepro February 10, 2016 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Mayor Bill Peduto speaking at a podium. Mayor Bill Peduto was in the hot seat Wednesday afternoon talking about economic and racial disparities in the city. The mayor, who does a monthly spot at noon on WESA’s Essential Pittsburgh, focused on Pittsburgh’s affordable housing issue, racial bias on the police force and Flint’s water crisis, among other topics. Peduto acknowledged that although Pittsburgh is a city growing economically and technologically, a large portion of its residents aren’t feeling the positive effects of those developments. Peduto said the Penn Plaza debacle — where residents, the city and developers are still in talks about relocating displaced low-income families — is an example of the city stepping in to offset gentrification. “Think about the history of this city. We have forced people out of public housing,” Peduto said. “For the first time, we are getting involved in private housing.” In early January, Peduto pitched his idea for using federal Section 8 funds to subsidize housing so that low-income families could afford to own, rather than rent, homes. The mayor’s office has created about 200 affordable housing units in Larimer, 150 in the Hill District and 150 in East Liberty, according to Peduto. “We have plans in the next several years for thousands more,” he said, adding that 7,000 people have applied and qualified for affordable housing in Pittsburgh. The city’s most recent affordable housing action took place at the end of January, when it struck a deal with owners of the Crawford Square Housing Development in the Lower Hill District. In the 1970s, 188 of the units were set aside to be affordable housing, but the restrictions on selling 143 of those properties at market value ended in 2016. The mayor’s office wrote to McCormack Baron Salazar and AIG, the owners of the Crawford Square development, near the end of 2015 to encourage them not to redevelop and move low-income families out. “With the increasing popularity of Pittsburgh as an urban destination and the resultant rising rent levels, it is extremely critical that the City maintain the economic diversity that makes it the special place it is,” Peduto wrote in the letter in November. The Urban Redevelopment Authority of Pittsburgh and the Housing Authority of Pittsburgh agreed to dedicate $20 million to the development and closed the deal, securing the affordable units for the next 30 years. Peduto was cautious about overemphasizing the economic benefits of technological powerhouses, including Uber and Google. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “[It’s] a big mill being built, basically, with technology and innovation,” he said, but added that about 20 percent of people have no access to that technology or its economic ripple effect. “This is the same thing we had a hundred years ago — you had the people that owned the mills and the people that worked in the mills, and there was a vast difference between the two of them,” Peduto said. “Is there a role for government in order to be able to provide opportunity…or should the market decide that?” Reach PublicSource intern Elizabeth Lepro at elepro@publicsource.org and follow her on Twitter @LeproLiz. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Economy , Homelessness , Overlooked communities