Posted in posts , Uncategorized California tackles climate change with ambitious new bill by Natasha Khan October 7, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X California Gov. Jerry Brown signed a climate change bill Wednesday that sets new renewable energy goals, part of the state’s efforts to aggressively combat climate change. “This is big,” he said, according to an LA Times article. “It’s big because it’s global in scope. It’s also big because it’s local in application.” The measure will require California to get 50 percent of its electricity from renewable energy sources by 2030, which is a big bump from its current goal of 33 percent by 2020. The bill was meant to be even stronger in its efforts to fight climate change, but it was amended and a part that would have required a reduced amount of gasoline used on roads in the state was thrown out after strong opposition from the oil industry. From the LA Times: The state’s target is expected to stimulate the development of more solar and wind power plants, but it will also raise new challenges. Renewable energy can be unreliable because it’s impossible to predict when the sun shines or the wind blows, and experts say California will need to invest in storage technology and other initiatives to ensure the right amount of electricity is available when it’s needed. The state will also need to become twice as energy efficient by 2030 under the new law. For existing buildings, that could include installing newer appliances or improving heating and air conditioning systems. Under a 2004 law , Pennsylvania utilities are currently required to purchase 8 percent of power from alternative energy resources, including wind and solar. That may change as regulators figure out how the state will muster a 32 percent drop in carbon dioxide pollution over the next 15 years, required under Obama’s Clean Power Plan. The state’s plan is due to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency by September 2016 . Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan