Posted in DEVELOP PGH Replacement housing for Bedford Dwellings gets city’s OK The City Planning Commission gave its approval to affordable apartments in the Hill District and Uptown, plus a place in Hazelwood for robots and their handlers. by Lucas Dufalla July 25, 2023 July 25, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A rendering of the proposed Colwell Street development presented to the City Planning Commission on July 25, 2023. The Housing Authority of the City of Pittsburgh [HACP] got the go-ahead Thursday to begin making its new vision of affordable housing in the Hill District a reality. On Thursday, the City Planning Commission approved plans for a three-structure, 123-unit mixed-income development on Colwell Street as a part of the authority’s larger blueprint to redevelop Bedford Dwellings, the city’s oldest public housing community . The 4.98 acre site sits south of Bedford Dwellings, and is meant to take in an unspecified number of households who will be relocated during the redevelopment. “There’s folks that are anxiously looking forward to moving into a new unit. That’ll free up space for future phases of development,” said Joe Hackett, a principal at landscape architecture firm LaQuatra Bonci. Last week, news broke that HACP won a competitive $50 million Choice Neighborhoods grant from the Department of Housing and Urban Development. Under the plan, all 411 units in Bedford Dwellings will be completely demolished and rebuilt to make way for more than 800 mixed-income units on and around the existing public housing community. The project will begin construction in September and is set to be completed by 2025. Plan for robots in Hazelwood gets nod Commissioners also approved plans to turn part of a former brownfield site into Carnegie Mellon University’s new three-story, 150,000-square foot Robotics Innovation Center. The metal-and-glass research building will feature one and a half acres of “running room” for robotics testing. A large part of the “running room” will be an flexible outdoor research environment that will allow robotics engineers to see the effects different types of terrain have on their machines. A rendering of the Robotics Information Center’s outdoor laboratory presented to the City Planning Commission on July 25. “There might be moon rocks one day, and they might be planting things and doing urban agriculture research another day. It’s a really flexible outdoor research environment,” said Jennifer Askey, an associate principal at architectural firm Perkins Eastman. Adjacent to the laboratory will be a drone cage and an agricultural zone, among other features. The building’s facade and fencing will heavily feature glass and art meant to engage the public. “We want this to happen. Hopefully it’ll spur the next young minds to get into robotics research,” said Bob Reppe, CMU’s assistant vice president and university architect. Earthwork on the project is set to begin in August and the university estimates that the building will be substantially completed by May 2025. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Affordable and workforce housing coming to Uptown Turning to Uptown, commissioners also approved development of a new 51-unit, multi-use residential development on Fifth Avenue. Located on a currently-vacant lot, the development will feature 23 workforce units, 17 deeply affordable units and 11 market rate units. “Deeply affordable” housing refers to units for households earning below 30% of the area median income. Workforce housing refers to housing that is affordable to the average worker. The development is a Low-Income Housing Tax Credit project and is “geared toward workforce-owners” according to Geoff Campbell, a principal at Rothschild Doyno Collaborative. Lucas Dufalla is an editorial intern with PublicSource and can be reached at lucas@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: affordable housing , Carnegie Mellon University , hill district , Public Housing