Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Friday derailment roundup by Sabrina Bodon February 19, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Over the past several years, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Eight states provided funds to upgrade, close railroad crossings The Federal Railroad Administration has awarded about $10 million in grants for nine projects to improve safety at railroad crossings, especially those routes frequented by crude oil and ethanol carriers. Funded by the federal Safe Transportation of Energy Products by Rail Program, the $10 million has been distributed among: Arkansas, California, Illinois, Louisiana, Minnesota, North Dakota, Washington state and Wisconsin. U.S. crude oil inventories are at record highs Data from the Energy Information Administration released Thursday showed U.S. crude oil inventories rose by 2.1 million barrels last week, a new record high. Crude stockpile imports rose by 795,000 barrels per day, bringing crude oil supplies to 504.1 million barrels, about 78.5 million more barrels than last February . Gasoline stocks also showed an increase with 3 million barrels, six times more than initial forecasts, for a record of 258.7 million barrels. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Scientific panel advises EPA with new draft of report On Tuesday, the scientific panel reviewing the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s report on hydraulic fracturing and drinking water released a second draft with changes in the report’s wording and tone as well as criticisms, according to State Impact . The second draft by the Hydraulic Fracturing Research Advisory Panel expressed concern over the EPA’s lack of “various assessments, field studies, and other research.” The panel advised the EPA to revise the ambiguous conclusions in the report on the impacts of water from oil and gas fracking, which it says has left the public with more questions than answers. Environmental groups sue Oklahoma oil drilling companies The Oklahoma Sierra Club, along with several other environmental groups, have filed lawsuits against three oil drilling companies whose activity they say has caused an increase in earthquakes in the state. The environmental groups cite the use of hydraulic fracturing by Chesapeake Energy Corp., Devon Energy Corp. and the New Dominion as the preeminent cause of the state’s spike in earthquakes. The lawsuit came just days after the Feb. 13 5.1 magnitude earthquake, which could be felt in seven other states . Reach PublicSource intern Sabrina Bodon at sbodon@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy