Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 1, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 1, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Highmark’s chemotherapy tab runs to $170 million A new financial disclosure revealed that UPMC members’ chemotherapy debt reached $170 million. Previously, Highmark decided to stop paying fees when patients were treated at outpatient facilities. Pittsburgh: Steelworkers union sues Allegheny Ludlum for loss of health insurance Specialty metal producers plan to cancel health insurance for 95 office and technical workers who had been part of the union workers’ lockout earlier this month. Coverage is planned to end Tuesday, but union officials claim these workers should be covered until Nov. 30. Pittsburgh: Vick signing sparks conversation for animal welfare After the signing of quarterback Michael Vick as a Steelers’ quarterback, animal welfare groups recognize opportunity for awareness of animal abuse and dogfighting. Currently, two bills are pending in the state legislature relating to animal cruelty, both pertaining to leaving a pet unattended. Pittsburgh: Study connects obesity and stillbirth A University of Pittsburgh study said that obese women are twice as likely as others to give birth to a stillborn baby. The higher the body mass index (BMI) and a woman’s blood pressure are, the higher the chances that this will occur. Allentown: Grandmother sentenced to 5 years after crashing car while high Injuring her eight-year-old grandson, Diane Nieves-Lopez crashed her car into a Salisbury Township building while high on heroin and has yet to face her family. Nieves-Lopez pleaded guilty to charges that include driving while under the influence of a controlled substance and causing an accident while she was not properly licensed. NATIONAL Obama to rename country’s tallest mountain President Barack Obama will deliver a message to Alaska this week about the threat of climate change. In addition, he is renaming Mt. Mckinley as Denali , its original Native American name. Obama used his executive power to make the change. Arizona mom claims she drowned her children Mireya Alejandra Lopez, mother of three, told authorities that she intentionally drowned her two-year-old twin sons in the bathtub, and tried to drown a third. The cause of death for the two boys is unknown until an autopsy can be done, but Lopez was charged Monday with two counts of homicide and one count of attempted homicide. Brain eating amoeba takes teen’s life The rare and fatal brain eating amoeba Naegleria fowleri claimed the life of a 14-year-old boy in Houston after he went swimming with his cross-country team in Sam Houston State Park. His headache turned to total loss of brain function in days. OPEC opens up about falling oil prices In the spotlight for descending oil prices , the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries said it was ready to talk to other producers. The exact discussion is still unclear but will focus on the moderation of production levels. IN OTHER NEWS Elementary teacher returns to classroom after severe head injury Two years ago Megan Kruth, teacher and triathlete , flipped her bike, which led to a subdural hematoma and a 10-day coma. Kruth went through rehabilitation and had to learn basics such as eating and walking, but returned to Hance Elementary in Pine-Richland to begin her 20th year teaching. The daily report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.