Posted in #generation , IN-DEPTH , Uncategorized Technology is changing the Millennial brain by Elaina Zachos November 14, 2015 August 8, 2019 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Sunyoung Cho looks out the ceiling-to-floor window of the packed coffee shop in Pittsburgh’s Oakland neighborhood. She sips from a paper cup while busyness brews around her. Then Cho, a 30-year-old postdoctoral researcher at Carnegie Mellon University, picks up her iPhone and swipes at the screen. Patrons at the counter are looking at their smartphones, too, waiting in line for their caffeine fixes. Students are staked out at tables, earbuds in and laptops on. The U.S. Census Bureau says there are 83.1 million people between the ages of 18 to 34 in the nation. Studies show the average Millennial spends 18 hours per day using any type of digital media. And, 90 percent of young adults use social media, which is up from 12 percent in 2005, the Pew Research Center reports. The Millennials, in general, are more educated and connected. But, many of the generation’s young minds are still developing. Scientists at the National Institute of Mental Health say the human brain continues to mature until age 25. And if their brains are constantly assaulted by backlit screens, they might not develop in the same way as their parents’. Although research in brain development among Millennials is fairly new, some medical experts say the brains of people in this generation are physically developing differently because of their almost constant interaction with technology. These changes in the organ could affect Millennials’ communication skills. Technology use can affect the parts of the brain that control the core of a person’s personality, from how they work in a team down to hand gestures and expressions. “I think it’s very possible” that technology alters the brain, said Kirk Erickson, principal investigator of the Brain Aging & Cognition Health Lab at the University of Pittsburgh. “But we haven’t yet directly linked these things.” Illustration by Allan Ajifo / flickr Science behind it The brain develops based on how it’s used. Texting and web surfing use different parts of the brain than reading or speaking . Some neuroscientists have targeted which parts of the developing brain are affected by technology use. According to researchers at the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, there are changes in the ways the prefrontal cortex, cerebellum and parietal lobe mature. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Erickson, also a psychology professor at Pitt, said these sections work in tandem to affect communication skills. “There’s so many different forms and types of technology,” he said. “There’s many different brain areas that get engaged.” The prefrontal cortex, which resides in the frontal lobe, controls personality, cognition and social behavior. The cerebellum coordinates and regulates muscular activity, including those linked to language. The parietal lobe deals with interpreting language and words. Excessive tech usage, according to leading scientific publications, atrophies the frontal lobe, breaking down ties between different parts of the brain. Too much technology use also shrinks the outermost part of the brain, making it more difficult to process information. Erickson said this can affect the way people interact. “You might see changes in your ability to regulate emotions, your ability to remember certain events, your ability to pay attention to different things,” he said. “These things all together will certainly affect how you communicate with people.” In some cases, people have become clinically addicted to technology. Kimberly Young, a licensed psychologist and professor at St. Bonaventure University in New York, has studied Internet addiction disorder, or IAD, for the past 20 years. “We’re all a bit too connected,” Young said. “We socially accept it.” She’s found that IAD is just as dangerous as other drug addictions. Patients have the same poor social skills, grades and health because they can’t control the urge to be online. She’s treated people who have developed blood clots from sitting in front of their computers for hours on end. Many of Young’s patients have chronic problems, like attention deficit disorder and obesity. They’re distressed, disinterested and disengaged. Some have trouble reading traditional, paper books because they’ve only read off tablet screens. It’s difficult to pin down exactly which environmental or hereditary factors change brain composition, so research on brain development and technology use is ongoing. Grace Muller (right) and Aubrey Whelan, both 26, sit in the Crazy Mocha coffee shop in Pittsburgh’s Friendship neighborhood. Muller says she feels more relaxed now that she’s deactivated her Facebook account. (Photo by Elaina Zachos / PublicSource) A different wavelength Many Millennials may not need to pick up on traditional communication norms. Through their phones, they don’t have to filter social cues or subject matter. Even Millennials have mixed opinions about this. Grace Muller, 26, has deactivated her Facebook account. She tries to limit her daily time online to eight hours during her job at the community resource center Casa San Jose, and one hour at home. “There’s not a lot of reason for us to be alone with our thoughts when you can have your phone with you 24 hours a day,” she said. But some Millennials don’t think their generation is suffering in the communication department. Kirby Shramuk, a Pitt student studying business and Asian studies, said Millennials don’t have bad communication skills. It’s just comforting for them to look at their phones when they’re surrounded by strangers. Shramuk admits that sometimes, she keeps her earbuds in when she’s not listening to music. Like many other Millennials, whether they admit it or not, she brings her phone into the bathroom with her. “I think technology is becoming a necessity in most everyday lives,” Shramuk said. Millennials are bringing their phones into the classroom, too. Deborah Good, a professor at the University of Pittsburgh’s Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business, has been teaching college courses for more than 30 years. She’s concerned about Millennials. “[Their] attention is being paid to the info coming off smartphones,” Good said. “They interact in 140 characters or less.” Millennials aren’t on the “same wavelength” as people from older generations, she added. Erickson, who has been teaching for seven years, said he’s seeing a change in young people as well. “Students are not coming to office hours very much and meeting with me one-on-one,” he said. “I think that students are much more comfortable sending email.” In class, his students take to their phones. Instead of copying handwritten notes, they’re typing on laptops or snapping pictures of his presentation slides. “I have mixed feelings about it, really,” Erickson said. “It’s hard to judge what’s good and what’s bad.” Technology-attached Millennials are also on a collision course with other generations who might perceive their use in a negative way because they work differently. Irene Prendergast, owner and president of the human resources consulting firm Advanced Workforce Solutions in Moon Township north of Pittsburgh, works closely with many Millennials. “They pull out these cellphones in the middle of meetings … [and] cause a lot of angst in a corporation,” she said. “They’re great kids and they have a lot to offer. What they bring just needs to be focused in the right area.” Constant, rich communication? Heavy technology use might actually help with communication, said S. Shyam Sundar, a professor in the Penn State College of Communications and co-director of the Media Effects Research Laboratory. Sundar said the idea that Millennials are bad at picking up emotional cues and can’t talk face-to-face is dated. “I think we’ve come a long way from that,” he said. “In [a] sense, we are actually able to communicate more richly.” Technology lets people constantly keep in touch, he said, regardless of age or geography. A child can easily call his grandparents or send them a message. People across the world can challenge each other in the same video games. Texting is almost as instantaneous as speaking. “They feel like they’re in the same frequency because of constant communication,” Sundar said. Communication norms may even change with this new generation. Although face-to-face interaction seems to be the “gold standard” among older generations, he said it might not be viable in the future. “Millennials might not even think about face-to-face as the ideal,” Sundar said. “Face-to-face might almost be an inconvenience and somewhat pointless.” Amy Jordan, president of the International Communication Association, has conducted research on media effects in relation to health, primarily focusing on children school age to age 25. Jordan said young people use technology to separate them from adult culture. They want to relate to each other rather than to their parents. “I think it’s also normal that they would want to do that,” said Jordan, also director of the Annenberg Public Policy Center at the University of Pennsylvania. But to keep that connection across generations, people may need to adapt to Millennial trends. “I think it’s going to be important for the older generations right now to kind of keep in touch with younger generations through some of these technologies,” Erickson said. Reach PublicSource intern Elaina Zachos at ezachos@publicsource.org . See our previous stories about Millennials here . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI 70 replies on “Technology is changing the Millennial brain” https://uljin-anma5.blogspot.com says: July 23, 2019 at 6:53 pm Everything is very open with a precise explanation of the issues. It was truly informative. Your website is useful. Thanks for sharing! https://Arlette-horse.blogspot.com says: July 23, 2019 at 4:21 am It’s in fact very complex in this full of activity life to listen news on TV, so I only use internet for that reason, and get the most up-to-date information. https://Ryanne-trout.blogspot.com says: July 23, 2019 at 4:06 am This article is really a good one it assists new web users, who are wishing for blogging. https://goose-Chrystal.blogspot.com says: July 23, 2019 at 3:04 am What’s up to every , because I am in fact eager of reading this web site’s post to be updated regularly. It carries nice material. ahliqq says: July 22, 2019 at 9:06 am I beliege everything published was actyally very logical. But, what about this? what if yoou wer to create a awesome post title? I amm not suggesting your content is not good., however sulpose you added a title to maybe get people’s attention? I mean Technology is changing the Millennial brain – PublicSource | News for a better Pittsburgh is a little plain. You ought to peek at Yahoo’s fdont page and watch hhow they create post headlines to grab people to click. You might add a video or a related picture or two tto get people interested abhout what you’ve written. In my opinion, itt would bring your posts a little bbit more interesting. https://Demetrius-tiger.blogspot.com says: July 22, 2019 at 8:45 am When I originally left a comment I appear to have clicked on the -Notify me when new comments are added- checkbox and from now on every time a comment is added I receive four emails with the exact same comment. Is there a means you are able to remove me from that service? Thank you! https://Bellamy-scorpion.blogspot.com says: July 22, 2019 at 8:26 am When I originally commented I appear to have clicked the -Notify me when new comments are added- checkbox and now whenever a comment is added I recieve 4 emails with the exact same comment. There has to be a means you can remove me from that service? Thank you! https://Nova-Penguin.blogspot.com says: July 22, 2019 at 7:16 am Hello, i think that i noticed you visited my web site thus i got here to go back the prefer?.I’m trying to in finding things to enhance my site!I guess its ok to use some of your ideas!! https://caiman-Janis.blogspot.com says: July 22, 2019 at 5:59 am I am regular reader, how are you everybody? This article posted at this web page is actually nice. https://Tristen-camel.blogspot.com says: July 22, 2019 at 5:07 am Hi there, after reading this awesome post i am as well cheerful to share my knowledge here with mates. https://Fraser-chimpanzee.blogspot.com says: July 22, 2019 at 3:35 am Amazing things here. I am very glad to peer your article. Thank you a lot and I am taking a look ahead to contact you. Will you please drop me a mail? https://Jordy-turbot.blogspot.com says: July 22, 2019 at 1:18 am Hmm it appears like your site ate my first comment (it was super long) so I guess I’ll just sum it up what I had written and say, I’m thoroughly enjoying your blog. I too am an aspiring blog blogger but I’m still new to the whole thing. Do you have any recommendations for first-time blog writers? I’d really appreciate it. https://mutton-Darcie.blogspot.com says: July 22, 2019 at 12:11 am It’s hard to come by educated people about this topic, however, you sound like you know what you’re talking about! Thanks https://Pigeon-Cerys.blogspot.com says: July 21, 2019 at 9:06 pm Aw, this was an incredibly good post. Taking a few minutes and actual effort to produce a superb article… but what can I say… I procrastinate a whole lot and never seem to get anything done. https://Japanese-Dermot.blogspot.com says: July 21, 2019 at 9:47 am I don’t know if it’s just me or if perhaps everyone else experiencing issues with your website. It appears as if some of the text in your posts are running off the screen. Can someone else please comment and let me know if this is happening to them too? This may be a issue with my internet browser because I’ve had this happen previously. Thank you Zapatillas Tienda Oficial says: July 21, 2019 at 9:41 am Hello, its nice article regarding media print, we all be familiar with media iss a fantastic source of data. https://Maya-woodpecker.blogspot.com says: July 21, 2019 at 7:07 am If you desire to take a good deal from this piece of writing then you have to apply these methods to your won blog. Markowe Płaszcze says: July 21, 2019 at 12:36 am Ciekawy post, generalnie to ma sens, chociaż w niektórych aspektach bym się kłóciła. Na pewno sam blog może liczyć na szacunek. Z pewnością tu jeszcze wpadnę. https://sheep-Leila.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 9:20 pm An outstanding share! I have just forwarded this onto a co-worker who has been doing a little homework on this. And he in fact bought me dinner because I stumbled upon it for him… lol. So let me reword this…. Thanks for the meal!! But yeah, thanx for spending time to talk about this matter here on your web page. https://centipede-Yasmin.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 7:14 pm I do not know if it’s just me or if everyone else experiencing issues with your blog. It seems like some of the text on your posts are running off the screen. Can someone else please comment and let me know if this is happening to them too? This may be a issue with my web browser because I’ve had this happen previously. Kudos https://wall-kropanma2.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 5:22 pm Hi there! Do you know if they make any plugins to help with SEO? I’m trying to get my blog to rank for some targeted keywords but I’m not seeing very good success. If you know of any please share. Cheers! https://pony-Leia.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 5:01 pm Oh my goodness! Incredible article dude! Thank you, However I am having issues with your RSS. I don’t know the reason why I can’t subscribe to it. Is there anyone else having similar RSS issues? Anyone that knows the solution will you kindly respond? Thanx!! https://hapcheon-opanma.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 4:12 pm Have you ever thought about publishing an e-book or guest authoring on other blogs? I have a blog centered on the same subjects you discuss and would love to have you share some stories/information. I know my subscribers would enjoy your work. If you’re even remotely interested, feel free to send me an email. https://hawk-Livia.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 3:59 pm I was pretty pleased to find this page. I wanted to thank you for your time for this particularly fantastic read!! I definitely appreciated every bit of it and i also have you bookmarked to see new things on your website. https://daejeon-kropmasasage8.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 1:41 pm Thanks for finally talking about >Technology is changing the Millennial brain – PublicSource | News for a better Pittsburgh <Loved it! https://Erick-turbot.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 1:34 pm You really make it appear so easy with your presentation however I in finding this topic to be really something that I feel I’d never understand. It kind of feels too complex and extremely vast for me. I’m looking ahead in your next post, I’ll attempt to get the grasp of it! https://ansan-massage.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 12:57 pm I do agree with all of the concepts you have presented in your post. They are really convincing and will definitely work. Still, the posts are too quick for newbies. May just you please extend them a bit from subsequent time? Thank you for the post. https://Celestia-hedgehog.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 11:49 am If some one desires expert view concerning blogging after that i recommend him/her to go to see this website, Keep up the nice job. https://Isobel-grasshopper.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 11:23 am May I simply just say what a relief to find an individual who actually understands what they are discussing online. You certainly know how to bring a problem to light and make it important. More people really need to read this and understand this side of your story. I was surprised you’re not more popular given that you certainly possess the gift. https://Denzel-gorilla.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 9:21 am Thank you for any other informative site. Where else could I get that kind of info written in such an ideal means? I have a project that I am just now operating on, and I’ve been at the look out for such information. https://Pip-queen.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 8:31 am I pay a quick visit daily a few blogs and websites to read articles or reviews, however this weblog presents quality based writing. https://Elle-Monkey.blogspot.com says: July 20, 2019 at 2:43 am If some one desires expert view about blogging after that i recommend him/her to pay a quick visit this website, Keep up the pleasant job. Marynarki says: July 18, 2019 at 11:47 pm Piękny post, generalnie to ma sens, choć w kilku kwestiach bym się kłóciła. Z pewnością sam blog może liczyć na szacunek. Z pewnością tu jeszcze wpadnę. BestMaggie says: July 18, 2019 at 11:19 pm I see you don’t monetize publicsource.org, don’t waste your traffic, you can earn extra bucks every month with new monetization method. This is the best adsense alternative for any type of website (they approve all sites), for more info simply search in gooogle: murgrabia’s tools pokerpelangi says: July 16, 2019 at 11:21 am Very nicce article, totally what I was looking for. www.thffc.co says: May 7, 2019 at 11:34 pm Link exchange is nothing else except it is only placing the other person’s blog link on your page at appropriate place and other person wiol also do similar in favor of you. Alt Mainqq says: April 25, 2019 at 2:16 pm Wow! At ast I got a blog from where Ican really get useful data regarding my study and knowledge. Darryl R Taylor says: April 25, 2019 at 4:14 am I encountered this article doing a search to see if there were any co operative neuroimaging studies done across the generations from the people born a century ago through to millenials and the two gens following. Specifically I was curious to see of there had been any examination of alterations in structure and function between those who grew up with radio plays vs early television, on a similar way to how people imprinted at an early age by monochrome television dreamt in black and white, while those who grew up with technicolor could again dream in colour. Even if such studies had been done (or even the raw data recorded) it would still require reverse extrapolation across relative ages to determine correlative differences. But I personally feel very safe asserting that they would be there to be found. Part of the tragedy of the modern age is that there are few “control h7mans” left on this planet, and even they are being exposed to side effects of our tech that are extremely subtle but constant. Some of them become less and less likely to be provable with time, such as the theory that there are senses beyond the classic five that will be permanently impaired in these younger generations and those to follow. I won’t go into detail on those for fear of stumbling off into Kook Land, or at least being dismissed out of hand, but I would suggest looking up some of the controversies surrounding our inundation by modulated radiation on almost all frequencies of the EM spectrum. The key thing is to consider the effects of very small things that are repeated incessantly for years and decades. I feel bad for many youth, not do much for some of the things that they have lost or will  never have, but because many of those things will be unimaginable to them and therefore might as well have never existed at all. I can’t write any more, else this would be in danger of “essay-itization”. But, good article. tangkasnet says: March 20, 2019 at 9:32 am Right here is the perfect blog for anybody who wants to find out about this topic. You realize so much its almost tough to argue with you (not that I really would want to…HaHa). You certainly put a new spin on a topic that has been written about for ages. Great stuff, just great! Strefa Anity says: March 12, 2019 at 2:38 am Idealny post, ogólnie to ma sens, choć w niektórych kwestiach bym się kłóciła. Na pewno ten blog zasługuje na uznanie. Myślę, że tu wrócę. Stodniowka 2019 says: March 10, 2019 at 1:43 am Ciekawy wpis, w sumie masz racje, choć w kilku kwestiach bym się kłóciła. Z pewnością Twój blog zasługuje na szacunek. Jestem pewna, że tu wrócę. my website says: March 9, 2019 at 7:14 am Hi there Dear, are you truly visiting this web site regularly, if so then you will absolutely obtain nice experience. アイランドタワークリニック says: March 9, 2019 at 1:04 am 植毛の手術アイランドタワークリニックの自毛植毛は、薄毛に悩む人には、画期的に髪の毛が増加するので世界的に人気があるオペです。ただし専門知識が豊富な熟練の医者に施術を依頼しないと思っているほどの植毛実績は得られません。薄毛グッズに比べて、合計の負担額も安くなるのでお得な薄毛治療と言えます。 dong ho treo tuong dep says: March 6, 2019 at 1:05 am Useful information. Fortunate me I discovered your web site by chance, and I’m shocked why this coincidence didn’t took place in advance! I bookmarked it. 啨惞滰5976新闻网、啨惞滰、5976新闻网、啨惞滰新闻网 says: March 5, 2019 at 9:08 pm http://www.5976news.com、啨惞滰5976新闻网、啨惞滰、5976新闻网、啨惞滰新闻网 qq online says: February 26, 2019 at 8:22 pm It’s really a great and useful piece of info. I am glad that you just shared this useful info with us. Please stay us up to date like this. Thanks for sharing. daha yeni başladım says: February 26, 2019 at 1:59 pm I Ԁo agree ԝith all tthe concepts уou have offered on уⲟur post. Thеу’rereally convbincing ɑnd cаn Ԁefinitely ᴡork. Νonetheless, tһе posts аre vеry brief for starters. Could yoս please extend tһеm a Ƅit frfom neⲭt time? Ꭲhank you for the post. toko bunga jakarta selatan says: February 25, 2019 at 7:22 am magnificent issues altogether, you simply won a emblem new reader. What may you suggest in regards to your post that you simply made some days in the past? Any certain? Silicone bracelets says: February 25, 2019 at 1:15 am I savor, result in I found just what I was having a look for. You’ve ended my 4 day long hunt! God Bless you man. Have a nice day. Bye https://www.siliconewristbandmanufacturer.xyz Glory says: February 21, 2019 at 4:58 pm hello!,I really like your writing so so much! share we be in contact extra about your article on AOL? I require a specialist in this house to unravel my problem. May be that is you! Having a look ahead to peer you. 真钱斗地主游戏平台 says: February 18, 2019 at 6:13 pm http://www.mz8878.com、真钱斗地主游戏平台、真钱斗地主游戏网站、玩真钱的斗地主、福吉佳食品股份有限公司 フラワー バッグ says: February 17, 2019 at 12:11 am I am impressed with this website, rattling I am a big fan. AG真人视讯 says: February 16, 2019 at 7:19 pm http://www.px8898.com、AG真人视讯、AG真人视讯网站、AG真人视讯官网、AG真人视讯官网 adorable pets says: February 14, 2019 at 11:52 pm Again it must be created from fairly rugged material as this sort of dog is going to be involved with numerous sorts of movement. If you have brought new equipment to your journey, it is advisable to allow your furry friend for being familiar with it before use.  Although they cannot really consume humans in a few amounts of bites, these parasites once they gnaw, they’re able to leave some illnesses or some serious or life-threatening health diseases in the process. Gabrielle says: February 14, 2019 at 10:58 pm Super artykuł, generalnie to ma sens, chociaż w kilku kwestiach bym polemizowała. Z pewnością ten blog zasługuje na szacunek. Z pewnością tu jeszcze wpadnę. Emmanuel says: February 14, 2019 at 3:19 pm Piękny wpis, ogólnie się z Tobą zgadzam, jednakże w niektórych kwestiach bym polemizowała. Na pewno ten blog zasługuje na szacunek. Z pewnością tu jeszcze wpadnę. hd video says: February 14, 2019 at 12:05 pm Good article. I definitely love this website. Stick with it! Adidas superstar factory store says: February 9, 2019 at 4:31 am Very good website you have here but I was curious if you knew of any forums that cover the samme topicss talked about here? I’d really ike to be a part of group where I can get advice from other knowledgeable people that shzre the same interest. If you have any suggestions, please let me know. Thanks a lot! Jacquelyn says: February 3, 2019 at 11:35 pm Have you ever considered writing an ebook or guest authoring on other sites? I have a blog centered on the same subjects you discuss and would love to have you share some stories/information. I know my visitors would value your work. If you’re even remotely interested, feel free to shoot me an e-mail. gielda.men says: February 3, 2019 at 12:13 am Ciekawy artykuł, generalnie masz racje, jednakże w niektórych aspektach bym polemizowała. Z pewnością sam blog może liczyć na szacunek. Jestem pewna, że tu jeszcze wpadnę. Reviews, says: January 28, 2019 at 11:10 pm This is a very good tip especially to those new to the blogosphere. Brief but very accurate information… Thanks for sharing this one. A must read post! pandorarings.in.net says: January 26, 2019 at 6:24 am 80% Off On Pandora Charms jewellery. profit of special sale prices for the mythical being charms rings and jewellery you like. Pandora charms Silver jewelry Outlet eightieth Off. stunning Pandora handcrafted rings, earrings, and necklaces at outlet discount costs. Shop these Last chance designs. mythical being Outlet eightieth Off currently. pandora outlet sales hugh discount. Explore a lot of pandora Pandora Charms deals.Pandora Outlet Sales|Shop mythical being Up to 80th Off Pandora Sale‎. New Arrivals on the official pandora. 80 Off mythical being Charms deals. PANDORA® jewellery and Charms. Lamar says: January 23, 2019 at 11:47 am Piękny wpis, ogólnie się z Tobą zgadzam, choć w kilku aspektach bym się kłóciła. Na pewno Twój blog zasługuje na uznanie. Z pewnością tu wrócę. Quality shiatsu massage says: December 25, 2018 at 9:45 pm The Positive Effects of Reiki on the Human Body Reiki is renowned for its positive results around the human body. However, many people of people who never have yet experienced its power know very well what exactly Reiki does and what its effects are. If you are thinking about how Reiki will help you, then keep reading to see what Reiki can perform for your health, mind and soul. 1. Increases one’s body’s capacity to heal itself. Normally, one’s body features a defense system which functions good so long as the Ki flow just isn’t interrupted. When the Ki is not capable to flow through our bodies, illnesses and diseases can seem. Reiki stimulates the flow of positive energy, thus enabling our bodies to heal itself and fight the external and internal attacks more efficiently. 2. Cleans your body of most toxins. Because it acts about the physique, it really is one of the few complete detox programs one can follow. In addition to that it does not involve refraining from food or another form of activity. Yet, mental poison must be banned from the individual’s mind while they will have a negative impact upon treatments. 3. Promotes health, positive thoughts and relaxation. The principles of Reiki rely on positive thinking, thus a satisfaction and relaxation is induced on the individual. By removing negative energy and promoting a sense peace, the recovery process will probably be easier and shorter, no matter the illness or disease where the consumer suffers. 4. Works on the digestive tract and enhances the benefic connection between every little thing a person ingests, from food and water to medicines and curative herbs. Thus, it could be proven to work as being a complementary therapy for those already taking medicine, but at the same time it can be just the thing for maintain the individual’s health in good parameters. 5. Works on personal feelings, helping people defeat negative experiences off their lives and managing unexpected or unpleasant situations from their lives. People with depressions, anxieties or suffering from stress can see dramatic improvements of the conditions following the Reiki sessions. 6. Makes the transition from life to death easier. It helps the soul transcend into immortality and your body feel less suffering from this transformation. This is why many Reiki adepts use the Ki to create their transition derived from one of world to another smoother. Reiki offers healing for all those kinds of bodily conditions, as well as the spiritual problems. It is like a best friend for many those people in need of assistance, but it may also relieve healthy people from quotidian stress and problems. You can see more information here on website : http://reiki-master.cf/ pelangi poker says: December 8, 2018 at 12:33 pm always i used to read smaller articles or reviews which as well clear their motive, and that is lso happening with this piece of writing which I am readong at this place. Www.tvhd.com.br says: November 29, 2018 at 4:04 am Somos  um grupo de voluntários e  abertura um novo regime de nossa comunidade. Seu local   ofereceu nos com valioso informação  para trabalhar em. Você tem  feito  um formidável trabalho e nosso inteiro  comunidade será grato  para você. Kalene Nicole says: August 5, 2017 at 10:53 am I honestly don’t believe technology is taking away from face-to-face moments… Or experiences away from the computer. Weddings, vacations on the beach, having a baby, etc, are all still experiences younger generations, and older, experience today Jane Waselinko Berrettini says: August 5, 2017 at 8:07 am But what about face to face? Is that a thing of the past? Older generations took comfort in large families,through which they got support. A hug, enjoying the laughter of a new baby, the romance of planning a wedding, a walk on the beach looking for sea shells.Sure these things can have a down side, but the rich memories of a life time seem to be dwindling to what can be experienced on a screen., Kalene Nicole says: April 29, 2017 at 12:58 pm I’m usually a big fan of PublicSource articles, but this one I have a hard time coming to terms with. It assumes that millennials only use technology for social media. This doesn’t take into account those who read news articles, those who read e-books, those who write blog posts, those who use online research databases to write scholarly articles, the list goes on. This doesn’t even take into account the fact social media can bring people to these resources listed above. The article also neglects to mention anything about baby boomers and gen x populations who use ‘technology’ (or I guess social media, as this article is really getting at). How often do you see older generations out at restaurants, looking at their cell phones instead of engaging with their adult/teenage kids? I also don’t see any mention of how technology is also affecting adults brains. Brains aren’t stagnant— neuroplasticity,  the concept that the brain will adapt and change based on circumstances, no matter what your age– isn’t something to be ignored. On another note, I also see no problem in reading a news article or blog post while waiting 5 minutes for my coffee at a cafe instead of ‘being alone with my thoughts’. Technology isn’t going anywhere– we just need to learn to utilize it for things other than social media, and stop pointing the finger at the younger generation, as so many of these types of articles seem to do. Marilyn Ross says: April 16, 2017 at 10:58 pm I find this very concerninglll Comments are closed.