Posted in COVID-19 URA coronavirus programs in great demand; more help coming by Rich Lord March 26, 2020 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A screenshot of Sam Williamson, chair of the board of the Urban Redevelopment Authority, conducting a meeting of the board by video conference on March 19, 2020. Urban Redevelopment Authority efforts to cushion Pittsburgh residents and businesses against the economic effects of the new coronavirus are drawing intense interest, officials indicated late Wednesday. A URA program created last week to help those struggling, because of the crisis, to cover housing costs has already drawn some 400 potential applicants. The program pays as much as $3,000 per household, and its initial allocation was $300,000 — enough to cover just 100 applicants at the maximum amount. The URA is “currently fundraising for the program and trying to help as many people as possible,” wrote URA spokesperson Gigi Saladna, in an email response to questions. The Urban League of Greater Pittsburgh is administering the program. It is open only to residents of the City of Pittsburgh with household incomes at or below certain income thresholds who have lost earnings due to the coronavirus crisis, and who need short-term help dealing with rent, mortgage payments or utilities. The URA also allocated $1 million to provide loans, of as much as $15,000 each, to small businesses in the city facing losses due to the virus and the resulting shutdown of much of the economy. The URA’s Small Business Emergency Loan Fund has gotten 174 applications, seeking a total of $2.3 million. “All of our loan officers are working at maximum capacity to meet the overwhelming demand,” wrote Saladna. Tom Link, director of the URA’s Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship, wrote that the agency is handling the crisis via its “new remote/lean infrastructure” in which all employees are working remotely. “The exponential demand on our program is soon to far outpace our ability to make these emergency loans,” he added, and the agency is eager to work with local, state and federal governments to save businesses and jobs. A URA affiliate, the Pittsburgh Economic Industrial Development Corporation, is administering, within the city, the state’s new COVID Working Capital Assistance program , which can make interest-free loans for as much as $100,000. Details on URA efforts are here. The agency is working on more measures to help businesses and business districts, which it expects to announce next week. Rich Lord is PublicSource’s economic development reporter. He can be reached at rich@publicsource.org or on Twitter @richelord. Develop PGH has been made possible with funding from The Heinz Endowments. PublicSource has a special page dedicated to our reporting on COVID-19 for the Pittsburgh region. See it here and sign up for our newsletter to stay informed. We hope you are following the news and, if your situation allows, social distancing guidelines .  Have a tip or an idea? Please email mila@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord