Posted in Inside our Newsroom Donations to support our impactful journalism matched by Alyia Paulding June 10, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X We’ve got great news to share. A group of generous, civic-minded readers have gathered together in support of PublicSource’s nonprofit newsroom and pledged to match gifts for our June fundraising campaign. What does that mean for you? Through June 15, 2024 all donations will be DOUBLED, and your donation goes twice as far, until our match funds are exhausted. Match my gift! This is an amazing opportunity to show that you value the in-depth journalism that PublicSource provides for our region. Over the past year, support from readers like yourself has helped power stories that: Actively fight misinformation Improved food access for local refugees Inspired community members to volunteer at organizations serving our unhoused neighbors Shared the experiences of families forced to leave their homes due to health issues after EQT fracking nearby Investigated how our area’s wealthiest universities invest their funds Highlighted what Clairton’s high school football team taught a local author about family and resilience ; and much more. But time — and match funds — are limited, so don’t wait. Make your MATCHED gift to our newsroom today and help make stories for a better Pittsburgh possible. Give now Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow Alyia Paulding alyia@publicsource.org Alyia (they/she) is the Director of Membership and Development at PublicSource, working to establish and nurture relationships with donors and funders. Before joining PublicSource in 2020, Alyia worked... More by Alyia Paulding