Posted in DEVELOP PGH Pitt’s BioForge approved, bringing further tech facilities to Hazelwood A City Planning Commission hearing and vote means that both Pitt and CMU are cleared to build on the vast brownfield along the Monongahela River. by Eric Jankiewicz September 19, 2023 September 19, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A rendering of the University of Pittsburgh's proposed BioForge building, slated for Hazelwood Green and approved by the City Planning Commission on Sept. 19, 2023. Hazelwood’s buildup of modern manufacturing is poised to continue with city approval of the University of Pittsburgh’s plan for a biomanufacturing facility. The City Planning Commission approved a proposal for a 68-foot-tall building totaling 185,000 square feet that will house a cell- and gene-therapy facility. The approval of the BioForge building continues the high tech redevelopment of the 178-acre area known as Hazelwood Green, which includes the neighboring Mill 19, housing Carnegie Mellon University’s Manufacturing Futures Institute. And nearby is a site for which CMU recently received commission approval to build a robotics laboratory . Architecture firm HOK expects construction of the BioForge facility to begin later this year and to be completed by mid-2025. Pitt has partnered with a Massachusetts-based company, ElevateBio, and construction of BioForge is expected to cost $250 million, according to HOK. An aerial view presented to the City Planning Commission of the Hazelwood Green site with red outline around the BioForge site. ElevateBio works on gene and cell therapy, a process that can be used to alter people’s cells and genes as a way of addressing and eliminating serious neurological genetic diseases. Jamilah Ducar, executive director of Pitt’s Engaged Campus, emphasized the university’s community outreach efforts “Pitt has a long history of outreach with the Hazelwood community going back to 2000,” Ducar said. She said that in the process of holding community meetings, Pitt found that the primary concern from residents is “broad economic inclusion.” She continued, “to that end we’ve worked diligently on workforce development.” She said that as a result of this outreach and training efforts, Hazelwood residents will be prepared for the new job opportunities coming to the area. Only one member of the public voiced their opinion during the commission’s hearing process. Michael Murray, of Hazelwood, said he was retired and had developed an “emotional connection to the site.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting He said that he was happy to see that the new facility would complement Mill 19. “We as a community are very, very interested in seeing the dynamics of how everything is choreographed,” Murray said. “We don’t want to lose the genuineness of that site.” Eric Jankiewicz is PublicSource’s economic development reporter and can be reached at ericj@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ericjankiewicz . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: CMU , development , hazelwood , Pitt , Pittsburgh Eric Jankiewicz ericj@publicsource.org Eric Jankiewicz is a reporter focused on housing and economic development for PublicSource. A native New Yorker, Eric moved to Pittsburgh in 2017 and has since fallen in love with his adopted city, even... More by Eric Jankiewicz