(Illustration by John Peña) Posted in Community storytelling Larimer’s 103-year-old ‘Mr. Tony’ taught me Pittsburgh history, cement mixing and how immortality emerges When I met Tony Mainiero seven years ago, I could not have guessed where an interview would lead — or how much raisin bran I’d help to haul. by First-person essay and illustrations by John Peña November 24, 2023 November 26, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X I met 103-year-old Anthony Mainiero, aka Mister Tony, in the Pittsburgh neighborhood of Larimer in 2016. I was conducting interviews with senior residents of Larimer for a new work of temporary public art that later became Larimer Stories . Tony and I instantly bonded over our shared interest in trimming hedges and Pittsburgh’s history. Soon, we began working together on house projects, going grocery shopping at ALDI on Penn Avenue, and taking field trips around the city. I began recording audio and video interviews with him, but the core documentation of my time with Tony emerged in the form of my diary comics called Daily Geology . Every day for the last 14 years, I’ve made a drawing about my day in which I record a memorable moment. Through spending time with Tony, I experienced Pittsburgh from a distinct and historically resonant perspective. On each block we drove through East Liberty, Tony recalled faces, names, and buildings long since passed. Tony is a living historical archive with virtually no counterpart. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting I soon began publishing collections of these drawings in book frorm.  To purchase full-length comics, visit my online shop www.johnpena.net/shop . To read more, visit my Instagram page @johnpenastudio . John Peña is a Pittsburgh-based multidisciplinary artist who make comics, sculpture and public art. He can be reached at johnpena@johnpena.net . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Aging , centenarian , leadstorynoshow , Pittsburgh