Posted in DATA , Local Government , SALARIES DATA Find out how much the City of Pittsburgh paid its staff in 2017. Take our quiz. by J. Dale Shoemaker and Natasha Khan April 2, 2018 May 8, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X What does it take to run the City of Pittsburgh? Last year, it took 3,894 people – some 3,400 of whom worked full time. They’re the people who drive the ambulances, pave the roads, answer your calls and represent you on city council, among many other jobs. Last year, the city budgeted about $8.4 million more for salaries than it did in 2016 and about 40 percent of the city’s budget goes to pay its workers, not counting benefits. How exactly was all of that money spent? Because it represents a significant portion of your tax dollars, PublicSource believes in making this data public and easy to understand. This year, we’re breaking down the data with a twist: This quiz is a fun way to learn how your tax dollars are spent. We’re also providing you with access to the full datasets, so you can take some time to explore the numbers on your own. Let us know if you have any questions. *Note: Answers will appear above the answer choices. We hope you like “The Office” as much as we do because you’ll see some references! This data story was fact-checked by Eric Holmberg. Scott Dempsey helped clean the data for this story. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan 4 replies on “Find out how much the City of Pittsburgh paid its staff in 2017. Take our quiz.” Robert Zacharias says: May 18, 2018 at 11:55 am That makes sense. Upon looking again at the list I’m seeing that only a small fraction of the police officers are anonymized (I think for some reason I didn’t have that impression when I first looked it over). Thanks for the reply! Halle Stockton says: May 17, 2018 at 4:23 pm Hi there – this is Dale, one of the reporters who worked on this story. Some officers are anonymized because the Pennsylvania Right To Know Law lets the city withhold the names of those who are working undercover or on covert projects. You can read more about this in section 708(b)(6)(iii) http://pafoic.org/right-to-know-law-exceptions/ hstockton says: April 13, 2018 at 2:55 pm Some police officers are anonymized based on their duties for the bureau and if they are operating in an undercover capacity. Robert Zacharias says: April 5, 2018 at 11:29 am Could you share why police officers are anonymized on the spreadsheet you linked? Comments are closed.