Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Firefighters responding to chemical fire in Leetsdale by Natasha Khan November 17, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Update: This post previously stated that the fires were located at Weatherfield Engineered Chemical Company, which is a previous owner. Allegheny County officials now say the site is owned by The Lubrizol Corporation. 2:20 p.m.: About 72 homes have been evacuated on Washington Street in Leetsdale Borough after a blast at a chemical site according to a statement by Allegheny County Emergency Services. Two chemicals were released, ammonium persulfate and sodium chlorite, and both can cause problems when inhaled, county officials said. Crews are monitoring air quality, Emergency Services Chief Alvin Henderson told reporters. “The best thing is obviously not to inhale the smoke if you can help it,” Henderson said, according to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . The fires happened at The Lubrizol Corporation’s Oil Field Chemistry site northwest of Pittsburgh and Sewickley. According to the county statement: There have been a total of eight individuals with injuries or treated. Two workers were injured in the initial incident – one was taken to Mercy Hospital with chemical burns and one was taken to AGH with chest pains. We do not have any information on their conditions. Additionally, one other worker was taken to AGH with chest pains and two were seen on scene and refused transport. One firefighter was transported to Sewickley Valley with chest pains. Two other firefighters were seen on scene and refused transport. The evacuated residents were directed to wait in the gymnasium of Quaker Valley High School. Two buildings caught fire, but the fire is mostly under control, according to county officials. “ One building appears to be a total loss and has collapsed. The second has significant fire and water damage,” Amie Downs, the county’s director of communications, wrote in an emailed statement. People were being asked by county officials to stay away from Route 65 in the Leetsdale area. Buncher and Leetsdale Business Parks were evacuated out of an abundance of caution. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “Every few minutes you hear cans exploding — boom, boom, boom,” Ralph Black, 51, of Leetsdale, told the Post-Gazette earlier today. “You can see the firemen squirting water on them, but they explode and the fire gets worse.” Visit our media partner, the Post-Gazette , for continuing coverage. Crews hit hot-spots in building with collapsed roof. Eight injured. @PittsburghPG UPDATE: https://t.co/U8pnSHrsb5 pic.twitter.com/KOXv2xUrqO — Lexi Belculfine (@LexiBelc) November 17, 2015 Orange flames still visible below dark plume at center. Allegheny and Beaver county emergency crews are on site. pic.twitter.com/fAEzfP8f1p — Lexi Belculfine (@LexiBelc) November 17, 2015 Leetsdale Fire: Emergency Services on scene of Leetsdale Industrial Park. pic.twitter.com/4gMgGzv7wz — Allegheny County (@Allegheny_Co) November 17, 2015 Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan