Posted in Education Hoping for stability: A glimpse at one Squirrel Hill family’s start to the school year by Ryan Loew September 10, 2021 December 8, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X ï»¿ ï»¿ ï»¿ ï»¿ ï»¿ ï»¿ For Leanne Lisien, her husband, Brad, and sons Ian and Max, the start of this school year has been a matter of night and day. Before the sun comes up, 14-year-old Ian, a 9th grader at the Science and Technology Academy, leaves their Squirrel Hill home to take two Port Authority buses to school. Then about three hours later — sun now shining — 12-year-old Max leaves to catch his school bus to Sterrett 6-8. Schedules and transportation realities have changed for Ian and Max this year — all due to the bus driver shortage, according to the district. Ian’s start time is now about 15 minutes earlier than in the past. Max’s school bus arrives a bit later because school now starts at 9:25 a.m., 15 minutes later than before. It’s a back-to-school process the family is getting reacquainted with after more than a year of remote learning in Pittsburgh Public Schools. After a delayed school year start and with the COVID-19 pandemic lingering, Leanne said she is hoping for some normalcy this fall. Ryan Loew is PublicSource’s visual storyteller/producer and can be reached at ryan@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ryanloew . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram Ryan Loew ryan@publicsource.org x Ryan is a PublicSource visual producer/storyteller. He joined PublicSource after being a freelance producer of news features and documentary stories in the Pittsburgh region and beyond. His work appeared... More by Ryan Loew