Posted in Community storytelling Quote Source: Voices shaping the Pittsburgh region Explore the diverse perspectives and experiences of our neighbors as they share insights on the pressing issues affecting our communities. by Public Source February 22, 2025 February 25, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Our journalists spend countless hours with individuals and communities, uncovering complex stories that often carry hidden gems, which we’re now polishing off for you. Here’s what people are telling PublicSource about the issues important to Pittsburgh. “ We make sure we purchase our coffee and donuts from a place like that. You take care of companies that take care of labor. ” — Darrin Kelly, president of the Allegheny/Fayette Central Labor Council Read the story “ The funeral homes that are looking for white male employees are going to run out of white male students. ” — Pittsburgh Institute of Mortuary Science and Point Park instructor Chelsea Cush Read the story “ Imagine if the other thousands of nurses that work at the other hospitals were to get on board. ” — John Hobdy, a nurse at UPMC Western Psychiatric Hospital Read the story “ It’s unfortunate that Pittsburgh Public hasn’t necessarily hired those wonderful [students]. We’ve lost them to other districts. ” — Katie Salinetro, teacher in the Pittsburgh Public Schools Emerging Educator program Read the story “ Do I want to cede the future to a place where the generosity, the friendliness, the optimism, the the hope that is inherent in most nonprofit missions is extinguished? ” — Peggy Outon, nonprofit consultant and founder of the Bayer Center for Nonprofit Management Read the story “ Our power never came from the [NLRB]. It’s just a tool that’s used to support us. … Our power always came from our membership. ” — Cas Borowitz, organizer for Starbucks Workers United and shift supervisor at a Starbucks in Pittsburgh Read the story Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “ Right now I’m dealing with a billing error for a blood test. Two years ago I was overcharged for a vaccination. Before that, I went for a routine eye exam and was charged for a much more expensive procedure. ” — Juliet Zavon, resident of Squirrel Hill North Read the story “ This really helps to get things into memory for kids because it is involving their movement and their vision. ” — Taylor Erickson, reading tutor Read the story “ This was about making sure they had a say in their future and that they were given support necessary to transition into safe, long-term housing. ” — Muhammad Ali Nasir, known as MAN-E, of Community Care and Resistance in Pittsburgh Read the story “ I have to live in a bubble, you know, in order to not succumb to an attack. And I think that’s just a new reality that I’ve come to accept so long as I’m living here in Pittsburgh, or really near any major pollution source. ” — Qiyam Ansari, board president of Valley Clean Air Now Read the story “ We don’t have any funds for anything at all. And that’s what you chose to do with your money. ” — Rebecca Goldstein , who has experienced homelessness in Pittsburgh Read the story “ We will be heard. You will hear us. We will fight for America. Will you? ” — Kali McLaughlin, an organizer with Indivisible Read the story “ She just became so excited and proud talking about how she was like Attorney Woo. She got to a point where she was kind of proud of it. ” —Maribeth Hamel, mother of a daughter on the autism spectrum Read the story “ This could have the same harmful effect as running highways through Black and brown communities in Pittsburgh. We should make sure we’re doing this correctly. ” — Connor Hayes of Lawrenceville, speaking at a City Planning Commission meeting on inclusionary zoning Read the story “ All of us as international students here, even when we are OK in terms of migratory documents and we have our visas and everything, we can be scared too of what is changing. ” — Alejandra, a University of Pittsburgh student from Colombia Read the story “ Some of the architectural significance of gay bars of that period is that they’re pretty low profile because it wasn’t necessarily safe to be out. The anonymity is part of its architectural significance. ” — Dade Lemanski, who nominated Donny’s Place for historic designation Read the story “ America should be a leader on humanitarian grounds, not only in things like space or wars. ” — Khara Timsina, director of the Bhutanese Community Association of Pittsburgh Read the story “ I don’t know how they got away with it for so long. ” — Jerome Maynor, 74, who was denied continuation of methadone in the Allegheny County Jail in 2021 Read the story “ [Trump] will never rise to who Martin Luther King is and what he’s done for social justice, what he’s done to elevate his own people, to bring us together. I mean, he started a whole movement. ” — Joy Sato, Hill District resident Read the story “ We haven’t had a leader in a long time. It’s just amazing. Having Trump in makes us feel very safe and secure. ” — Kathy Wagner, a Shaler Republican activist Read the story “ Our mothers and their babies are dying [of] preventable causes, and that is unacceptable. Those numbers should be zero. ” — Dr. Margaret Larkins-Pettigrew, OB-GYN, senior VP at Allegheny Health Network and new member of the Allegheny County Board of Health Read the story “ A lot of the organizations, the agencies that are available to assist the community need to have one central communication center so that information can be branched off instead of doing little pockets of care. ” — Jacqueline Ruple, advocate for the Alzheimer’s Association Read the story “ Parents are afraid of accessing health care for their kids because they don’t know if that can get them deported. I don’t want to live in a community where people are afraid to go outside or advance economically. ” — Monica Ruiz, executive director, Casa San Jose Read the story “ For me, I want the developers to have a relationship with the community and we can’t do that with only one meeting. ” — Sonya Tilghman, executive director, Hazelwood Initiative Read the story “ When you’re talking about this, you have to make a choice, either move your history forward or lose it. ” — Stanley Lowe, member of Manchester Neighbors Read the story “ So my dream has come true. And, you know, right at the end — you never know when it’s going to happen — but right at the end, because I’m really trying to retire. ” — Keith Giles, executive director, First Step Recovery Homes Read the story “ When Blacks were rejected from an establishment, they built their own. ” — Gwen Cole Strickland, whose mother, Bettie Cole, chronicled Black Sewickley Read the story “ We have zoning for a reason. It was made to stop money-hungry developers from building unsafe structures. ” — Adrienne Johnson, longtime Fineview resident Read the story Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , leadstorynoshow , Pennsylvania , Pittsburgh