Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 21, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 21, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pennsylvania Pittsburgh: Highmark drops plan for statewide network Highmark has dropped a plan to create a statewide network that would allow doctors to access medical records regardless of the hospital in order to get quicker access to records. The company said that they instead are going to build closer relationships with healthcare providers. Hulton Bridge now open The first cars drove across the new $65.7 million Hulton Bridge that links Harmar and Oakmont on Tuesday. The long-awaited bridge stretches over the Allegheny River. Somerset County: Tiny Town defunds cops The small borough of Boswell opted to defund its two police officers in order to pay utility bills. The small town and its 1,200 residents will now have to depend on state police for coverage. Bellefonte: Jerry Sandusky will appear in court A Judge signed an order that Jerry Sandusky , former Penn State assistant football coach, be brought to court in Centre County. Sandusky, serving 30 to 60 years in state prison after being found guilty of child-sex abuse, contends that his trial attorney was ineffective. Statewide: Turnpike may say goodbye to call boxes The Senate Transportation Committee analyzed a bill Tuesday to remove call boxes from the Pennsylvania Turnpike because of a drop in use and a rise in cell phone ownership. If passed, the Turnpike Commission would save $200,000 a year and would remove the boxes. National American Cancer Society recommends fewer mammograms The American Cancer Society released a set of guidelines Tuesday suggesting that women wait until age 45, instead of 40, to begin annual breast cancer screenings. The guidelines concluded that mammograms can do more harm than good in younger women, as older women are much more at risk for breast cancer. See our news post . One less candidate Former Virginia senator Jim Webb announced Tuesday that he was withdrawing from the race for the Democratic presidential nomination. Webb said he agrees with those who identify as political independents and has yet to decide whether he will remain a registered Democrat. Continued Confederate flag controversy The Greene County Commission in Tennessee voted down a request to raise the Confederate flag over the courthouse in Greeneville. Twenty members of the the commission voted against the measure, while one sole supporter, James Randolph, argued that it served as a historic emblem. High school football tragedy Junior Cam’ron Matthews, 16, of Alto High School in Texas died Friday of a brain aneurysm after his football game. Matthew’s death marks the sixth of the season among high school football players, raising question about the game’s safety . In Other News Marty McFly finally arrives Today marks the day that Marty McFly of Back to the Future will arrive from 1985 to a future full of hoverboards and flying cars. In honor of the day , Lawrenceville’s Row House Cinema will be hosting a special viewing of the movie. The Daily Report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI