Posted in Equity , On the beat , posts Children now more likely to be placed with family in foster care by Halle Stockton May 17, 2014 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X As the number of children in foster care falls, kids who are removed from their homes in Pennsylvania and the rest of the nation are more likely to be placed with relatives. States are increasingly looking to family to step in as the safety net instead of putting children in group homes and other institutional settings, according to a recent analysis by The Annie E. Casey Foundation. Since 2000, the percentage of children living with kin in state-supervised placements increased 8 percent, and the use of group homes declined by 17 percent. Kentucky had the lowest rate of children living with kin at 5 percent, while Hawaii had the highest at 48%. In 2012, 25 percent — or more than 3,500 —  of foster children in Pennsylvania were placed with relatives. The national average of children placed in foster care with family was 27 percent. Arizona, Montana and Florida each had more than 40 percent of foster children living with relatives, according to the data, which the foundation acquired through the Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS), made available through the National Data Archive on Child Abuse and Neglect. About 397,000 children were in foster care in the United States as of 2012, the most recent year for which numbers are available. That number is nearly 24 percent less than the number of foster children a decade ago. Pennsylvania’s population of children in foster care fell 30 percent in that decade, which equates to at least 6,300 fewer children in the system. A March report by Pennsylvania Partnerships for Children highlights the state’s focus on addressing family issues without removing children from the home: Pennsylvania’s child-welfare system is serving more children today than it did five years ago, but we are relying much less on foster-care placement as an intervention. … Children are far better off when they can be served in their own homes rather than being placed in foster care. Foster-care placement has unintended negative consequences for children, including the trauma caused by separating children from their families, schools and communities. Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Care of children and elderly , Overlooked communities , Vulnerable populations Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton