Posted in Education ‘The time has passed’: PPS sues county to force property reassessments Less than a month after a board vote authorizing legal action, Pittsburgh’s school district has filed suit against Sara Innamorato’s administration seeking to compel a county-wide reassessment. by Lajja Mistry April 9, 2024 April 12, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Pittsburgh Public Schools Board at its public agenda review meeting on Wednesday, Feb. 21, 2024. (Photo by Pamela Smith/PublicSource) Pittsburgh Public Schools [PPS] has filed a lawsuit against Allegheny County to compel a county-wide reassessment of properties. The filing comes after the school board unanimously voted last month to authorize district solicitor Ira Weiss to take legal action. The lawsuit names the county and County Executive Sara Innamorato in her official capacity as defendants. PPS officials said they would approach the county executive’s office to consider a voluntary reassessment, but two weeks later that window is closed, according to Weiss. “We have provided the county executive with a reasonable time to consider our request to order the reassessment,” Weiss wrote in an email statement. “She has replied with the same general statements about more ‘review and study.’ The time has passed for that.”. Abigail Gardner, spokesperson for the county executive’s office, wrote in a statement that the administration is gathering data to analyze the implications of a reassessment. “Any reassessment must be revenue-neutral and not a backdoor tax hike for the people of Allegheny County and should protect seniors and low-income homeowners in the process,” she said, echoing Innamorato’s campaign position . “Ideally, reassessments would be state-mandated, mundane, regular occurrences and not once-per-decade shocks to the system. Our preference is to work with stakeholders to build a more predictable system for everyone.” EXECUTIVE DECISION Property taxes divide Allegheny County executive candidates, and Philadelphia’s experience looms large Sara Innamorato could bring changed, but fairer, property taxes, while Joe Rockey would avoid a reassessment that could hike bills. Across the state, efforts to blunt the pain of reassessment got mixed reviews. The county assigns tax values to properties, which are used in county, municipal and school district property tax bills. Property owners, municipalities and districts can appeal those values. The lawsuit states that the county’s assessment scheme violates the state’s Uniformity Clause that requires taxing bodies to evenly tax and assess properties within their jurisdiction. The district’s decision to sue follows appeals filed by Downtown property owners to reduce the assessed values on major commercial properties in the wake of the 2020 pandemic. In addition to plummeting commercial values, the district’s tax base has also suffered from a drop in the Common Level Ratio [CLR] from 87.5% to 54.5%. The CLR is a metric used to value properties reassessed after the base year. The revised ratio resulted from a 2022 lawsuit brought by property owners, and made appeals more favorable to owners. “Many appeals are still pending, and it is anticipated that the commercial tax base will continue to erode due to commercial property owners double dipping on their assessment reductions through the application of the CLR,” the lawsuit states. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The last reassessment took place in 2012, and the question of when, and if, to revisit that featured heavily in last year’s county executive contest. The county’s inaction since 2012 has “created a situation where the lower valued properties are over-assessed, and higher valued properties are under-assessed,” Weiss said. “This means those at the lower end of the spectrum pay more taxes than they should and those at the higher end pay less than they should. That is simply illegal and unfair.” PPS currently faces about 940 active appeals that could cost it $11.4 million in annual tax revenue. According to district CFO Ron Joseph, PPS will deplete its fund balance by 2026 and has projected a growing operating deficit. Unbalanced Updated: A lawsuit could lower thousands of tax bills and threaten Allegheny County’s ‘house of cards’ property assessment system Changing an obscure ratio used to determine some tax bills may bring lots of appeals and has spurred talk of a class-action lawsuit. During an education committee meeting last week, Joseph said assessment appeals for 2022-23 are projected to reduce the district’s tax property revenues by $4 million. Additionally, PPS might also have to pay $7.4 million in tax refunds, he said. City Controller Rachael Heisler cautioned PPS officials not to expect quick results from the lawsuit, given the immediacy of the district’s financial challenges. “The big issue I have about the lawsuit is you don’t file it and three months later have a result. You’re years away from collecting revenue on a reassessment. The district is in a much more delicate place than even the city,” she said. Charlie Wolfson contributed to this report. Lajja Mistry is the K-12 education reporter at PublicSource. She can be reached at lajja@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , lawsuit , pittsburgh public schools , PPS , property tax assessments , Reassessment , Sara Innamorato Lajja Mistry lajja@publicsource.org Lajja is the K-12 education reporter at Pittsburgh's Public Source. Originally from India, she moved to the States in 2021 to pursue a master’s degree in journalism from the University of Southern California.... More by Lajja Mistry