Posted in On the beat , posts Utah is saving money and reducing homelessness by Halle Stockton January 20, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Ten years ago, Utah implemented a program with a simple approach to ending chronic homelessness: Give homes to the homeless. The presence of chronically homeless people in the state has reportedly dropped by about 75 percent in the past decade, to fewer than 300 people. And the costs of providing services to this unstable group have been cut in half or more in some areas, according to a story by PolicyMic . Utah focused its Housing First program on the chronically homeless population, which it defined as people who have not had a home in the past year or have become homeless more than four times in three years, according to the story. Even though the chronically homeless accounted for only 10 percent of the state’s total homeless population, homeless advocates realized they used about 50 percent of the state’s homeless services. The chronically homeless usually have deeper problems – mental health issues, addictions and other challenges that prevent them from getting stable jobs and housing. That means they often end up shuffled between state-funded programs for years, wasting precious state resources in the process. In Salt Lake City for example, the traditional homeless services cost about $20,000 annually; under the Housing First program, the tab comes to about $8,000. Now, instead of piling on state-run service after service – hospital visits, prison, drug treatments, shelter stays – the state just gives homeless people homes. The idea is that having a house makes everything else much easier. “Getting people off the streets and get them into housing just works,” said Steve Berg, the vice president for programs and policy at the National Alliance to End Homelessness, in an interview with Mic. “Homelessness itself turns out to be a big barrier to all kinds of things, whether it is trying to get a job or trying to get an education or [trying to] stop a drug addiction.” Other cities have tried the policy, but Utah appears to be the largest area that has committed to the program. According to the story, trial housing-first programs saved significant amounts of money and reduced strain on the healthcare and law enforcement systems in Charlotte and Seattle. Many more cities, however, are making policy changes that effectively make living as a homeless person a crime. A study that’s tracked homelessness policy in 187 cities since 2009 found that 34% of cities have bans on camping, 24% ban begging and 53% have banned sitting or lying down in public places. These ineffective policies also seem to be increasing: The number of cities where it’s illegal to sit or lie on a sidewalk went from 70 in 2011 to 100 in 2014, according to the study. Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. Follow her on Twitter @HalleStockton . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Homelessness Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton