Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts Google launches an extraordinary genetic study by Natasha Khan July 30, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Google has begun a study that involves collecting body fluids and other genetic material from 175 participants. The Wall Street Journal reports that Google is attempting to create “the fullest picture of what a healthy human being should be.” The project, Baseline Study, is a prototype for future, much larger studies. It’s headed by molecular biologist Andrew Conrad, a member of Google X, Google’s “secretive” research lab. Once it has the information it needs, Google will look for patterns in the data, or biomarkers, that could help medical researchers detect diseases earlier. Baseline Study began this summer, when a clinical testing firm (Google wouldn’t say which one) started collecting urine, blood, saliva and tears from enrolled study participants. The study also will collect tissue samples from the participants, who won’t be identifiable by name or Social Security number once their information is sent from the testing firm to Google. Dr. Conrad and his team plan to design an expanded study — one that surveys thousands of people — with the medical schools of Duke and Stanford universities. From the WSJ report: The clinic in the pilot study, and later similar clinics run by Duke and Stanford, will recruit volunteers for Baseline. Lead investigators at these facilities, who are not Google employees, will collect the samples and remove information that is typically used to identify participants, such as names and Social Security numbers. Once the data has been made anonymous, Google and other researchers will get access to it, the company said. The information will include participants’ entire genomes, their parents’ genetic history as well as information on how they metabolize food, nutrients and drugs, how fast their hearts beat under stress and how chemical reactions change the behavior of their genes. The WSJ noted that the project raises some privacy concerns, such as the risk of insurers and employers accessing people’s genetic information. But Dr. Sam Gambhir, chairman of Stanford’s radiology department, told the WSJ that Google will not be given “free rein” to do whatever it wants with the data. Baseline’s team hopes to learn the genetic characteristics that help some people avoid serious diseases, to which others are more vulnerable. Reach Molly Duerig at 724-799-4098 or at mollyduerig@gmail.com. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan