Posted in BREAKING NEWS Trump says U.S. Steel will keep HQ in Pittsburgh as part of $14B ‘partnership’ with Japan-based Nippon President Donald Trump says U.S. Steel will keep its headquarters in Pittsburgh as part of what he called a “planned partnership” between the iconic American steelmaker and Japan-based Nippon Steel, which has sought to buy it. by The Associated Press May 23, 2025 May 23, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Hundreds of U.S. Steel workers braved freezing temperatures as they rallied outside of the company’s Clairton Coke Works in support of the company’s sale to Nippon Steel on Thursday, Dec. 12, 2024. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) WASHINGTON (AP) — President Donald Trump said Friday that U.S. Steel will keep its headquarters in Pittsburgh as part of what he called a “planned partnership” between the iconic American steelmaker and Japan-based Nippon Steel, which has sought to buy it. Nippon Steel’s nearly $15 billion bid to buy U.S. Steel was blocked by former President Joe Biden and, after Trump became president, subject to another national security review by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States. Trump said in a statement that “after much consideration and negotiation, US Steel will REMAIN in America, and keep its Headquarters in the Great City of Pittsburgh.” What Trump called a “planned partnership” will create at least 70,000 jobs and add $14 billion to the U.S. economy, he said, although it wasn’t clear what the terms of the deal would be or who would own U.S. Steel under the arrangement. The companies didn’t immediately comment. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow