Posted in Equity , IN-DEPTH , VIDEO Hortencia is a Dreamer in Pittsburgh, standing up for the embattled DACA program by Molly Duerig November 29, 2017 November 29, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Hortencia Ortiz Reyes is among 800,000 people living in the United States whose lives have been affected by the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program. Hortencia recently graduated from high school and is now living in Pittsburgh. She is 18. The Dreamers, as DACA recipients are referred to, have felt protected by the program — until recently. DACA, enacted in 2012 by former President Barack Obama, provides people who were brought to the United States as undocumented minors with privileges not afforded to other undocumented people in the country. DACA recipients can legally work, study and obtain driver’s licenses. Most importantly, they’re temporarily protected from deportation . DACA recipients must renew their status every two years, a process that takes time (120-150 days) and is costly ($465). The protection DACA grants is temporary, but it has been the best option available for many young immigrants who have lived most of their lives in the United States. In September, the Trump administration announced it would be discontinuing the program in six months. This gave Congress time to act, though it looks like the issue could be sending lawmakers toward a government shutdown in December. Hortencia applied for the renewal of her DACA status before the Oct. 5 deadline set by the Trump administration. She has not yet received confirmation, which is expected to take 90 days. But even if her renewal is successful, her future beyond 2019, and that of some friends and family, remain uncertain. For more on Hortencia and her journey, watch the video above. Molly Duerig is a freelance journalist who also manages the Filmmakers Youth Media program at Pittsburgh Filmmakers/Pittsburgh Center for the Arts. She can be reached at mollyduerig@gmail.com . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: DACA , immigration Molly Duerig _migrated-863-author/molly-duerig@example.com Molly Duerig is a freelance videographer. She collaborates with PublicSource reporters, creating visual content to accompany their stories. Molly has degrees in English and Spanish from Allegheny... More by Molly Duerig One reply on “Hortencia is a Dreamer in Pittsburgh, standing up for the embattled DACA program” tasam1 says: November 29, 2017 at 11:41 pm They are illegal aliens.  Their illegal alien parents smuggled the minors into the US in violation of immigration law.  The DACAs are now adults some as old as 36. The  DACA program is only a small portion of the number of illegal aliens that will  become the majority of voters in the US. Congressional  officials didn’t discuss  the future ramifications on jobs, environmental  effects,  etc. on that  many more people in the US.  Ask  the taxpayers what  they think another 40 million illegal  aliens that become citizens will do to the economy and their children and grandchildren’s future employment in competition with the 20-36 year old DACAs and other illegal aliens.  Only  32,000 out of 800,000 DACAs have a four year college degree.  From federal  information – 160,000 DACAs dropped out of school.   Another 160,000 have a high school diploma or a GED but no plans to go to college. President Trump ended DACA Sept. 5.   Time to start deporting them. Comments are closed.