Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Some at the Pittsburgh Triathlon had an especially crappy experience by Natasha Khan August 13, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X It seems that, for some folks, the Aug. 3 Pittsburgh Triathlon got a little … well, how do I say this … poopy. Several participants were likely exposed to levels of fecal bacteria deemed unsafe under state standards, Pittsburgh City Paper reports. One man was hospitalized for diarrhea and vomiting, according to the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review . The vile water was likely caused the day before by a storm that rolled through the area, which sparked a sewage overflow warning and sent raw sewage into the rivers. A few triathletes said they were misled by a chart near the starting line, which they believed showed bacterial counts in the Allegheny River were at a safe level, City Paper reports. Apparently the water was tested before the Saturday storm. From City Paper : John Stephen, who created the chart as the founder of Pittsburgh Triathlon host Friends of the Riverfront, expressed regret, saying he was trying to give athletes more information about water safety. “Everyone deserves more and better information about the quality of our river,” says Stephen. But on race day, he says, there can be “a large gray area.” The situation highlights how difficult it is to conduct real-time monitoring of river water quality. No one tests the water regularly to see if it’s safe for recreational purposes, and bacterial cultures can take 24 hours to grow, according to the article. And are the rivers consistently clean enough to encourage any large-scale swimming events? This past June, ALCOSAN issued sewer-overflow advisories on 11 of the month’s 30 days. But ALCOSAN cautions that the river might be “impaired” for up to 48 hours after an overflow, meaning 23 out of 30 days in June included potentially compromised river water. In July, 15 out of 31 days might have included higher-than-normal bacteria coun ts. The question, says Schombert, “is how long after these overflows stop does the river water quality return to normal?” As long as athletes are properly informed of the risks, they should be allowed to swim, Sarah Quesen, the open-water swim leader for the Pittsburgh Triathlon Club, told City Paper . Even if bacteria counts are higher than state guidelines, she said. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan