Posted in Daily report , posts July 14, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 14, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Downtown Macy’s to close Formerly Kaufmann’s, the only remaining department store in the city’s downtown has been sold to Core Realty, who will convert much of the store’s unused space into apartments, a hotel and parking spaces. A going-out-of-business sale starts July 20. Pittsburgh: Republican nominee for 37th District special election The Republican Party nominated Guy Reschenthaler , a former judge and military prosecutor, to run against a still-unknown Democratic candidate for the seat vacated by former state Sen. Matt Smith. Washington County: Former Judge Pozonsky to receive jail time Paul Pozonsky pleaded guilty to several charges related to stealing cocaine evidence from his cases. He’s sentenced to 30 days in jail and two years of probation. Harrisburg: Former city treasurer pleads guilty to two felonies John Campbell pleaded guilty to stealing $29,000 from political and charitable organizations that he oversaw. In a plea deal, Campbell agreed to pay full restitution by Sept. 15. Apollo: Community rallies against drug problem Armstrong County already has 13 reported overdose deaths this year, and the small Apollo borough is a hotbed for drug trade. Residents have made efforts to eradicate drug use by teaming up with local officials, counselors, police officers and treatment experts to form RAID — Residents Against Illicit Drugs, with an approach based on education, awareness and support. Erie: 14-year-old turns self in for murder The 14-year-old suspect allegedly attempted to steal the bike of 18-year-old Jacob Pushinsky before he shot him on Saturday. Derrys Sanders Jr. is charged as an adult with criminal homicide, murder, reckless endangerment and other crimes. NATIONAL Scott Walker joins Republican presidential field Walker, governor of Wisconsin , announced Monday morning that he would run for president. Although he’s the 15th to join the race, he’s poised to become one of the more serious contenders. President Obama looks at criminal justice reform On Monday, President Obama granted clemency to 46 prisoners whose sentences he said did not fit their crimes. The prisoners committed nonviolent drug offenses, mostly related to cocaine trafficking. It was the most commutations granted in a single day since the 1960s. Pentagon close to lifting ban on transgender soldiers The Pentagon is working toward releasing the ban on transgender people in the military , and a formal announcement is expected this week. The Pentagon plans to enter a six-month transition period to work out health care, housing and other issues. Cartel boss escapes from maximum-security prison a second time Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman escaped through a 20-by-20 inch hole in his shower at a federal prison near Mexico City. He escaped another maximum-security prison in 2001 by hiding in a laundry cart, and it took 13 years to capture him. If he’s caught, he faces extradition to the U.S. for numerous drug crimes. IN OTHER NEWS ‘Go Set a Watchman’ Harper Lee’s highly anticipated sequel to 1960 novel “ To Kill a Mockingbird ” arrives today. The novel is already a best-seller based on its pre-orders, but the New York Times ’ review finds it a chillingly racist read. CEO of Nintendo dies at 55 Satoru Iwata, CEO of Nintendo since 2002, passed away on July 11 from cancer. He’s remembered fondly by other industry tycoons . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.