Posted in Daily report , posts June 27, 2015 by Swalsh June 27, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Coyotes in the backyard They’re everywhere , including suburbs and cities. In fact, coyotes are close to maximum population density in southwest Pennsylvania, but they aren’t a problem if they’re not seen. And they often aren’t. Allegheny County: Port Authority expands service The Port Authority of Allegheny County approved a $398 million operating budget. Fares will not increase and four new routes will be added. Philadelphia: Crackdown on sex trafficking A sting operation led to the arrests of five men in the King of Prussia area. Local authorities placed online advertisements that attracted customers willing to pay money for sex. Philadelphia: The season’s not over, but Phillies manager is out Phillies manager Ryne Sandberg resigned Friday in the middle of his third season. Harrisburg: Child protection provisions greenlighted by committee Lawmakers seek to change a law regarding people who work with children. The new provisions will change the frequency of background checks from every three years to five years. The revised bill will go to the Senate early next week. Statewide: Identity theft protection Pennsylvania has the second highest volume of identity theft in the country, with about 172,000 cases last year. A new bill being pushed by U.S. Sen. Bob Casey (D-PA) would phase out much of Social Security number use in the medical system as a preventative measure. NATIONAL Same-sex marriage legalized in all 50 states The Supreme Court voted on Friday that states must recognize marriage unions of all kinds , with a vote of 5-4. President Obama delivers reverend’s eulogy On Friday, about 6,000 people attended the funeral for Clementa Pinckney, a state senator and pastor, slain at Emmanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church. Nine killed in Alaska plane crash A small plane crashed near Ketchikan, Alaska, with eight cruise-ship tourists and a pilot onboard. As of Friday afternoon, it’s unknown what caused the crash . WORLD More than 60 dead in terror strikes On Friday, France, Tunisia and Kuwait suffered various losses as Islamic State sympathizers carried out disparate, gruesome attacks — at a U.S.-owned factory, a beach resort and a Shiite mosque. Air Products and Chemicals Inc. in Allentown, Pa., owned the factory in France. IN OTHER NEWS PNC Park hot dog tied for third best in MLB One hot dog superfan took a pilgrimage to all of the Major League Baseball stadiums in the U.S. (there are 30 of them). He tried each stadium’s regular dog, and PNC Park ranked pretty well, tying for third with the Arizona Diamondbacks’ Chase Field. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI