Posted in DEVELOP PGH A North Side resident’s poem on how change in Pittsburgh looks, feels and sounds by Celine Barnickel March 4, 2019 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Celine Barnickel, 28, shares her poem "Change" on how development in Pittsburgh looks, feels and sounds. (Photo by Kat Procyk/PublicSource) Editor’s Note: PublicSource has an ongoing call for residents to submit creative contributions on how change feels in the Pittsburgh region. Below is a poem from a North Side resident as part of our Develop PGH coverage. This city we live in is growing maturing like the trees in our streets and parks if you blink the change will happen as the seed sprouts then rises like a sapling from the earth Boulevards are booming with street beats bouncing from steel frames to brick, mortar and concrete The course of our lives mimics the waves of the rivers this frames the city and direction of our generations as we move from neighbor’s homes to our own diverse neighborhoods Roads pulsate with the souls of us here and those gone our skins intertwined in the blur of a tapestry Hear one another’s words spill from lips that create a song of harmonious action moving us forward into the unfolding story of our youth, we are composers of an unwritten song Footsteps thunder like the beat of a hammer as we march towards a dream Celine Barnickel is a writer living on Pittsburgh’s North Side. Develop PGH has been made possible with funding from The Heinz Endowments. What does change in your neighborhood or business district feel like? What would successful urban design look like? How do you envision the Pittsburgh area 5, 10, 20 years from now? PublicSource is telling stories of development and what it means for everyone, from residents to developers. And we want to hear from you. In any media you prefer (essay, poem, song, video, photography, etc.), please share your creative ideas to be published on how a changing Pittsburgh feels, looks or sounds to you. Email jeff@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: community , crowd source , economic development , Pittsburgh , poem