Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts EPA official to PA: Get your act together and clean up the Chesapeake Bay by PublicSource contributor May 27, 2016 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pennsylvania has fallen behind the interim goals to reduce the amount of pollution it contributes to the Chesapeake Bay. At a clean water conference held this week, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Administrator Gina McCarthy said Pennsylvania’s efforts were “discouraging at the very least,” the Bay Journal reported. Pennsylvania is one of the largest contributors of pollution to the Chesapeake Bay, which borders Maryland and Virginia. Pennsylvania is the only member in the Chesapeake Bay watershed, which includes six states and the District of Columbia, that the EPA reported it had “substantial concerns” about, according to a 2015 interim progress report. The seven jurisdictions included in the Chesapeake Clean Water Blueprint plan are all expected to have pollution control measures in place by 2025, with at least 60 percent of the progress made by 2017. The EPA’s Chesapeake Bay Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) is a federal court-mandated plan established in 2010 aimed at curbing the volume of pollutants flowing into the bay. Although the state does not border the Chesapeake Bay, more than half of Pennsylvania lies within its watershed, according to the United States Department of Agriculture. The state has 35,000 farms in the bay’s watershed and together, the Potomac and Susquehanna rivers account for 40 percent of the watershed’s land area. Every minute, the Susquehanna River pours 19 million gallons of water into the Chesapeake Bay, according to Lancaster Farming . In January, Pennsylvania officials unveiled a plan to inspect more farms in the watershed, which are some of the largest sources of nitrogen pollution, to come into compliance with the Chesapeake Bay cleanup mandates. A Bay Journal story reported that EPA reviews found that fewer than 2 percent of Pennsylvania farms inside the Chesapeake Bay watershed were being inspected each year. The initiative is focused on reducing the levels of nitrogen, phosphorus and sediment from agricultural runoff in the Chesapeake Bay watershed. According to the EPA, “the excess nutrients and sediment lead to murky water and algae blooms, which block sunlight from reaching and sustaining underwater Bay grasses. Murky water and algae blooms also create low levels of oxygen for aquatic life, such as fish, crabs and oysters.” In its review of the state’s progress in 2014, the EPA found that Pennsylvania was “substantially off track” for its nitrogen reduction. Pennsylvania is currently 16.3 million pounds away from its 2017 agricultural nitrogen goal of 94.05 million pounds. The EPA last year temporarily withheld close to $3 million in federal funding from Pennsylvania until state officials showed the state was on track to meet its cleanup goals. This spurred Gov. Tom Wolf and John Quigley, who just resigned as secretary of the state Department of Environmental Protection, to implement a “reboot” of the state’s cleanup initiatives. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Reach Iain Oldman at ioldman@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI