Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY The Friday derailment roundup: March 27 by Natasha Khan March 27, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X They just keep piling up. Since early February, there have been at least four train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations. To keep up with what’s happening on the issue, PublicSource will provide a roundup of stories every Friday. Four Senate Democrats introduced a bill aimed at reducing the volatility of the crude oil shipped by rail from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale, according to PennEnergy. Senate Democrats offer bill to reduce crude volatility on rail cars Fire chiefs in Washington told a major railroad to hand over documents on crude oil shipments so first responders can be better prepared in case of a derailment, according to The Stranger. Washington Fire Chiefs Demand Transparency on Crude Oil Trains StateImpact Pennsylvania attended a training exercise in Delaware County where 150 first responders from around the state simulated a crude oil train accident. Preparing for the worst, Delco first responders simulate oil train accident The website, Planet Experts , ranked the continuing explosion of crude oil trains in North America as the most depressing environmental story of March. The 10 Most Depressing Environmental Stories of March 2015 Fayette County emergency responders say they’re prepared if they have to respond to a crude oil train explosion, according to the Uniontown Herald-Standard . Local hazmat responders prepared for crude oil train derailment Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy , Infrastructure , Transportation Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan