Posted in Equity , HEALTH , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Pittsburgh spearheads national war on overdoses with “360 strategy” by PublicSource contributor November 11, 2015 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration has named Pittsburgh as the pilot city for the “360 strategy” to fight drug addiction, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reports. The national initiative strives to help cities crack down on drug trafficking, substance abuse and violence by continuing enforcement measures, increasing awareness and providing communities with the tools to address the nation’s drug epidemic. The strategy will bring together officials and pharmacists Dec. 10 to discuss the issue. Special Agent Gary Tuggle, who leads the DEA’s Philadelphia Division, said in a press release : “The 360 strategy brings together for the first time the agencies that have dealt with this problem separately into a comprehensive and sustained effort to not only fight drug traffickers, but also to make communities resilient to their return.” The strategy is divided into three steps: Providing the city with DEA reinforcements to target drug traffickers and the underground  prescription painkiller market. Partnering with community groups and distribution centers to discuss prevention and treatment measures. Fighting stereotypes about drug addiction by working with local organizations to educate communities on how to combat the overdose epidemic. Short-term, the plan aims to inform the community — particularly young people —  about overdose prevention and treatment. Long-term, the 360 strategy hopes to spark a dialogue between community leaders and law enforcement by hosting summits to look for solutions to address the addiction, trafficking and violence that goes along with drug abuse. The strategy is a part of the National Heroin Task Force, headed by David Hickton, U.S. Attorney for the Western District of Pennsylvania. The task force’s report is slated to go to President Barack Obama by the end of the year. Hickton said in the press release: “Pittsburgh has the opportunity to lead the nation due to the strong commitment and cooperation among our leadership, law enforcement and citizens.” The rising number of deaths related to overdose in Allegheny County garnered support for adopting the 360 strategy. The reported overdose deaths have more than tripled from about 100 in 2000 to 306 in 2015. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting PublicSource has published several stories about the heroin crisis in the project Heroin: Riding the Rush . Reach PublicSource intern Elaina Zachos at ezachos@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice , Drug abuse and rehabilitation , Overlooked communities , State oversight of health and welfare systems , Vulnerable populations