Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts The number of veterans who die by suicide every day is startling by Halle Stockton July 7, 2016 January 9, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Twenty veterans a day. That’s the 2014 average of how many men and women who have served in the U.S. military die by suicide. Every day. It’s slightly lower than the 2013 average, when it was estimated that 22 veterans a day were dying by suicide. The Department of Veteran Affairs [VA] reported that the fluctuation may be due to different data collection and analysis and not an actual reduction in the rate of veteran suicide, according to The Associated Press. In 2013, the analysis was based on information submitted by fewer than half of the states. It didn’t include some states with the highest veteran populations. This time around, the AP reported that the VA tapped Department of Defense data to obtain more records, and every state and U.S. territory is represented. From the AP: Dr. David Shulkin, undersecretary for health at the Department of Veterans Affairs, told The Associated Press that [it] … was the largest analysis of veteran records ever undertaken by the department. He said the data gives the VA more information about where to direct resources and which veterans are most at-risk of suicide, but he’s hesitant to make any firm determinations about the overall trend and whether it’s getting better. “Twenty a day is not that different from 22,” Shulkin said. “It is far too high.” Here are some more significant numbers on the issue of veteran suicide: About two-thirds of veterans who died by suicide were 50 and older. The rate of suicide for female veterans was 18.9 per 100,000. “The risk for suicide is 2.4 times higher for female veterans than it is for female civilians,” the AP reported. The VA added 446 psychologists, 80 psychiatrists and 60 employees to the Veterans Crisis Line last year. Reach Halle Stockton at 412-515-0065 or at hstockton@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @HalleStockton . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Veterans affairs Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton