Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 14, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 14, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pennsylvania Pittsburgh: Mayor orders internal police investigation Mayor Bill Peduto ordered an investigation into the actions of a police officer who confronted a Chicago Cubs fan at the National League Wildcard game Wednesday. The investigation was sparked by an online video showing the officer throwing the fan to the ground from behind and handcuffing him. Pittsburgh: Local hospital participates in nationwide heart device trial Allegheny General Hospital is one of 65 medical centers that will participate in a study of a small device intended to isolate tissue that has been damaged by heart attacks. The device aims to increase blood flow to the heart. Pittsburgh: Start off the new year with paid sick leave City Controller Michael Lamb posted notice that the paid sick leave law takes effect Jan. 11. The law will affect about 50,000 workers in Pittsburgh. Opponents say the law is illegal and will seek an injunction. Lehigh Valley: Possible passenger rail service The Lehigh Valley Transportation Study has begun to analyze how a passenger rail service would work in the community. The PennDOT-funded study will look at the possibility of connecting with passenger rail services in New Jersey, New York City and Philadelphia. Statewide: Shale communities receive funding for local projects Areas rich with Marcellus Shale have received $8.1 million in state funding to support 44 projects to promote community development and housing availability. National First Democratic debate Democratic candidates Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders, Martin O’Malley, Jim Webb and Lincoln Chafee met in Las Vegas, Nevada for the first of six debates . Before the debate, Clinton had a 16-point lead over Sanders in Nevada. Investigators confirm MH17 shot down Dutch investigators confirmed Tuesday that Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was shot down over Ukraine in July 2014, but they still don’t know who did it or why. The report states that a Russian missile was launched into the cockpit and eventually broke off the front section of the plane. Budweiser-Miller Merger British-based beer company SABMiller has tentatively accepted a $106 billion offer from Anheuser Busch InBev, which if finalized, would result in the largest beer company in the world. SABMiller previously declined at least four other offers. Campaign music disputes Campaigners receive a lot of criticism, and the music industry is raising its voice again. For example, Steven Tyler of Aerosmith has sent two cease-and-desist letters to Donald Trump for using the song “Dream On” at campaign events without permission . In Other News ‘Playboy’ goes PG-13 Playboy magazine, which has been in print since 1953, will no longer feature nude images . Its website dispensed with nudity last year, and its reader base quadrupled. Starting in March, the magazine will its redesign that leaves a bit more to the imagination. The Daily Report was compiled by Christine Manganas and Stephanie Roman, PublicSource interns. You can reach them with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org and sroman@publicsource.org Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI