Posted in On the beat , posts The derailment roundup by Natasha Khan July 15, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. And June was a busy month for crashes. Over the past several years, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents, new safety regulations and other train derailments across the country, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories each month. It’s been three years since a Canadian town was ravaged by an oil train fire This July marks three years since an unmanned oil train carrying Bakken crude careened off the tracks in Lac Megantic, Quebec, killing 47 people and obliterating the small town’s city center. The tragic incident was the most devastating oil train accident involving Bakken crude in North America and led to calls for tougher safety standards and the phasing out of old tank cars. Shoddy tank cars involved in oil train crashes could stay on the tracks for 15 years Old tank cars involved in numerous oil train accidents in the past few years could remain in service for the next 15 years under a federal rule that is allowing companies to phase in the use of new, stronger tank cars, according to the head of the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board. But railroad officials say the use of those aging tank cars is declining Officials from the national railroad industry group said the use of the older cars (that are prone to leak and explode during crashes) to transport crude oil dropped 97 percent between 2014 and the end of March. The group also said the rail shipments of crude have also declined, from 498,271 in 2014 to 424,996 in 2015. But this is still loads above the mere 9,500 tank car shipments in 2008. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Feds propose new rules for crude oil shippers The U.S. Department of Transportation wants to require railroads moving crude oil to have comprehensive plans for what they’d do in case of a significant spill, including providing more detailed information to state and tribal authorities. The rule would “hold industry accountable to plan and prepare for the worst-case scenario,” Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx said.​ derailment of two cars because of a faulty joint in the rails blocked a downtown Tulsa street on June 2 for most of the day. No one was injured in the derailment. Minnesota governor makes some tough demands Gov. Jay Inslee has called on the federal government to issue an emergency order that would require railroad companies to send safety inspectors to walk rail lines at least 24 hours before shipping crude oil from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. In a letter to the head of the Federal Railroad Administration, Inslee wrote that current federal inspections standards are “insufficient to protect our communities from the imminent threat of fires, spills, and collisions that result from oil train derailments.” Reach PublicSource reporter and web developer Natasha Khan at 412-515-0063 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan