Power of Place STORIES IN THIS SERIES DONATE A new PublicSource series Power of Place Stories about how opportunity or lack thereof may affect the future of Pittsburgh youth. This year at PublicSource, we have been looking at how Pittsburgh neighborhoods are shaping children and driving their life outcomes. From language services at Pittsburgh Public Schools and school districts in Allegheny County to gun violence and generational poverty, many factors that make up a child’s reality have far-reaching effects. The stories in this series incorporate social research and interviews from Pittsburgh youth and the people serving them. Additionally, we worked with researcher Nick Cotter from the Pittsburgh Neighborhood Project to detail specific community factors associated with concentrated poverty that often lead to negative outcomes for children as they grow into adults. This project is ongoing. Explore the stories in this series below and check back for more. Stories in this series Xennials who grew up in the Pittsburgh area reflect on how their neighborhoods shaped their lives, then and now Oliver Morrison Moving to high-resource neighborhoods can improve youth outcomes. What happens to families and communities when they leave? Matt Petras How the neighborhood you grow up in affects your future Mark Kramer The Pittsburgh Study will follow up to 25,000 children for nearly two decades to track health, educational outcomes Mary Niederberger Collaboration between residents and police can reduce gun violence. But trust is crucial. Nick Cotter Black communities are disproportionately hurt by gun violence. We can’t ignore them. Nick Cotter Pittsburgh proposes prioritizing parks in vulnerable communities as research on parks’ benefits grows Oliver Morrison A crossroads of languages: How Pittsburgh schools respond to a growing immigrant population. Mary Niederberger This project has been made possible with the support of The Grable Foundation. Stories for a better Pittsburgh Get our stories by email. SIGN UP