Posted in Trump Impacts Is Washington changing your family’s summer plans? The federal cost-cutting push has caused some programs to scale back. With the school year winding down, vacation options shifting and tensions high, that could create new challenges. by Public Source May 28, 2025 May 28, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photo illustration by Natasha Khan Vicens/PublicSource) Schools are closing for summer. Programs are contending with scaled-back funding from Washington. Parks are in flux , events are facing political pressure and economic uncertainty is the new normal for many families. How are you handling a summer season like few others? We’d like to know about it, and we may include your perspective in future articles. Your name Your neighborhood of residence How funding cuts and program changes are affecting your summer plans At what email address can we reach you for further discussion? Would you like to join our newsletter mailing list? Yes, please! Not at this time Δ PublicSource may publish the information you provide, except for your email address. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow