Posted in Inside our Newsroom Why we’re making neighborhood zines and what we hope they spark Our journalism usually lives online. This time, it’s on paper — and in your neighborhood. Here’s the story behind our first North Side zine. by Halle Stockton May 28, 2025 May 28, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource staff members interact with attendees at the newsroom's launch party for its North Side zine, on May 22 at MuseumLab in Allegheny Center. What happens when journalism shows up on your block, not just in your inbox? That’s one of the questions we’re exploring through our neighborhood zines, which are short, tangible collections of stories, reflections and resources created with and for a specific community. We recently launched our first one on Pittsburgh’s North Side — or Northside, depending on who you ask. (Our style guide uses two words, but we love a neighborhood that sparks passionate spelling debates.) This is the inside story of how the zine came to be and where we hope it leads. Scenes from PublicSource’s North Side zine party on May 22, at MuseumLab in Allegheny Center. (Photos by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) At PublicSource, we believe journalism should feel human, not distant, not abstract, not like it was made somewhere else for someone else. It should reflect the realities of the people it’s meant to serve. And sometimes that means shifting the format, the tone or the place where journalism lives. This zine is one of our efforts to make local journalism feel more local. The idea: Make journalism more personal, more place-based We’ve spent the last 14 years producing deep, investigative reporting and community-centered storytelling for the Pittsburgh region. We’ve reached people by issue, interest and identity through stories on health, government, education, the environment and more. Attendees at PublicSource’s North Side zine party on May 22, at MuseumLab in Allegheny Center, talk about collages. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) We’re building on that work by getting even closer to home, so our journalism can matter more in your everyday life. With 90 neighborhoods in the city of Pittsburgh, 130 municipalities in Allegheny County and 43 school districts, our region is one of the most fragmented in the country. That’s daunting, but it also invites a place-based approach that can help people see the relevance of journalism in their everyday lives, not just in times of crisis or election season. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The neighborhood zines are one part of this approach. They’re meant to reach people offline and offer a kind of storytelling that feels approachable, grounded and maybe even delightful. The format: Low-tech, high-touch We intentionally chose the zine format: a small, printed publication you can hold, flip through, pass to a friend or tuck into your bag. It’s low-tech and high-touch. It slows you down just a little. It doesn’t ping or scroll. And it doesn’t require an algorithm to find its audience. PublicSource’s North Side zine. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) We designed the zine as something that might be picked up at a community center or a coffee shop. It’s something we hope feels familiar and serves as a snapshot of the people and ideas animating a place. The North Side edition includes a mix of PublicSource stories rooted in the neighborhood, along with new reflections, photography and community input. As we wrote in the foreword, this project grew from a belief that stories shared close to home can deepen our understanding of ourselves, our neighbors and the region we live in. That’s the heart of it. The bigger picture: Journalism that connects This zine isn’t just about repackaging what we already publish. It’s about rethinking what journalism can be and how it can be delivered. We know there are many reasons people disengage from the news: lack of trust, overwhelm, digital fatigue or the sense that it’s just not for them. Our job is to ask: What would change that? We believe journalism can be part of reconnecting people to each other and to the place they live. A poster board at PublicSource’s North Side zine party on May 22, at MuseumLab. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) We also know that one format or one strategy isn’t enough. The zine is just one piece of a broader effort, and it all feeds back into our core mission: To inform and inspire the Pittsburgh region through the power of deep, independent journalism. What we’re hoping for: Dialogue, discovery and what comes next We don’t see the zine as a one-off. We hope this is just the beginning of a deeper conversation with North Side residents and with other neighborhoods across the region. We’re curious to know: Did something in the zine resonate with you? Do you have a story idea you’d want us to follow up on? Want to stay in the loop about what we’re doing next? If you got a hold of one of our zines, we’d love to hear what you thought and what you want to see more of. You can email us with your ideas and sign up for our newsletters . The PublicSource staff on May 22, at MuseumLab. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) We’ve also launched a page on our website curating all of our North Side–relevant stories, from those based in the neighborhood to others that prominently feature people, organizations and issues across its 18 neighborhoods. Find our North Side page here , and bookmark it to stay connected. And if you’re reading this and thinking, “I’d love to help bring a zine to my neighborhood,” please get in touch. We’re already planning what comes next. Halle Stockton is the editor-in-chief and co-executive director of PublicSource. She lives on the North Side. Contact her at hstockton@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton