Posted in Daily report , posts May 12, 2015 by Alexandra Kanik May 11, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Uptown goes eco EcoDistricts, urban developers who aim to make cities more sustainable, selected the Uptown neighborhood to be an incubator for their project , which will include implementing a rapid-transit bus system. Pittsburgh: Sexual assault victims groups talk Plum High School Schools officials banned students from talking about sexual assault allegations at Plum High School, threatening them with arrest. Pittsburgh Action Against Rape and PA Coalition Against Rape are unhappy with the way the school treated the assaults, stating that the next case is inevitable and schools should prepare with the right training for educators and by making outside counseling available. Allentown: Creek restoration proposal The Bushkill Stream Conservancy and Forks of the Delaware chapter of Trout Unlimited have plans to restore a 2-mile segment of Bushkill Creek , which runs through Forks, Tatamy and Palmer Townships. The project will use bed manipulation to rehabilitate the creek and increase the trout population. Statewide: Medicare drug spending Medicare spent $141 million on Pennsylvanians taking asthma and COPD medication Advair in 2013, more than any other drug. The most prescribed drugs under Medicare in Pennsylvania were low-cost generics simvastatin and lisinopril, which are cholesterol and high blood pressure medications, respectively. Statewide: HR recommends Kane fire chief of staff An internal affairs investigation into Pennsylvania Attorney General Kathleen Kane’s acting Chief of Staff Jonathan Duecker, who’s being accused of sexually harassing two former employees, has concluded that he should be fired. NATIONAL Nebraska inmates overtake maximum-security prison Prisoners gathered around a housing unit Sunday and assaulted two officers at Tecumseh State Correctional Institution . The inmates took control of part of the facility, set fires, tore down the security cameras and ripped up the drywall. The riots were quelled Monday morning by guards in riot gear. Data rules the schools Some schools around the U.S. use extensive data tracking to monitor students and teachers. Metrics are used to improve bus routes, cafeteria food, cleanliness and grades. Advocates say metrics provide concrete evidence of what does and doesn’t work, but others debate that it ignores intangibles, like the relationships between students and faculty. Gov. Christie expense accounts New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie spent over $300,000 on food, alcohol and dessert since he took office. Even more shocking is that more than $82,000 of that was spent at NFL games, which is enough money to pay a year’s household income of a N.J. family, three years of tuition at Rutgers or 1,877 tickets to a preseason New York Giants game. Seattle ‘kayaktivists’ stand against Shell People opposed to Royal Dutch Shell’s proposal to lease a terminal at the Port of Seattle for its Arctic drilling fleet, took to the waters Thursday as a first show of solidarity against the oil giant. This week, the activists are organizing a “ShellNo Flotilla” of 1,000 kayaks to stand against Shell’s oil rigs. IN OTHER NEWS The “American Idol” falls The once-insanely popular singing competition will end after its 15th season, which will air in January 2016. Ratings for the show declined with each change to the judging panel and now Fox is looking to add new comedies and dramas to its primetime lineup next year. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI