Posted in Equity , IN-DEPTH , PUBLIC SAFETY The Zimmerman case by Bill Heltzel June 3, 2012 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The events in the case of David Scott Zimmerman, a basketball coach at Vincentian High School in Pittsburgh: 1993 Vincentian High School hires Zimmerman to coach boys’ basketball. A year later, he added teaching English and running the athletic department to his portfolio. June 1995 Vincentian principal rates Zimmerman’s work as unsatisfactory because of failure to follow rules and improper conduct. August 1995 A basketball player tells Vincentian’s principal that Zimmerman forced him to choose among three inappropriate actions in return for keeping a secret. The principal dropped her inquiry when the parents took their son out of  the school. December 1998 Another player and his parents complain to Vincentian about Zimmerman’s conduct. Zimmerman is forced to resign. McCandless police are notified and interview 13 boys who describe sexual misconduct by Zimmerman. January 1999 Vincentian agrees not to disclose why Zimmerman resigned, and Zimmerman agrees not to sue Duquesne. March 1999 McCandless police charge Zimmerman with corruption of minors and simple assault. July 1999 U.S. Attorney charges Zimmerman with possession of child pornography. January 2001 Zimmerman pleads guilty to corruption of minors and is sentenced to one year of probation. October 2002 Federal pornography charge is dismissed because of an improper search warrant. July 2008 Harmar police charge Zimmerman with sexual assault of a 20-year-old man. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting October 2009 Zimmerman pleads no contest to simple assault in the Harmar case. He is sentenced to 12 month’s probation. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Care of children and elderly , Criminal Justice , Vulnerable populations