Posted in On the beat , posts Zuckerberg wants you to live-stream your drone footage on Facebook by Sabrina Bodon April 12, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Within the next 10 years, will drone technology be dominated by social media leader Facebook? That’s what the tech giant has set for the future. At F8, Facebook’s annual developers’ conference, CEO Mark Zuckerberg announced the release of an interface that will bring the company’s live-streaming video feature to more devices, including drones. The Live API (application program interface) that Zuckerberg announced will be available to other developers to use with their programs. APIs give different pieces of software the ability to communicate with each other, according to TIME. During his keynote speech, Zuckerberg live-streamed an aerial shot of himself giving the speech using a DJI drone. DJI introduced live-streaming via drone with the announcement of the Phantom 3 in the summer of 2015. These features were only available through YouTube and Youku, its Chinese equivalent. Last month, a PublicSource investigation looked at the ongoing conversation between drone pilots regarding government regulations, privacy and safety surrounding drone technology. Drone usage has been rapidly growing. As of February, about 358,000 recreational flyers registered with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The use of drones by businesses has also skyrocketed with about 3,800 business approved nationwide as of March. In Pennsylvania alone, more than 90 businesses are authorized to fly drones. Drone-approved companies in Pennsylvania: As of Feb. 5, 2016, 92 companies located or operating in Pennsylvania have been granted a commercial exemption to fly drones by the Federal Aviation Administration. PublicSource has provided the location of each company by zip code, the make and model of the drone(s) and a description of how the drones are being used. Facebook wants to help the general public by being on the forefront of drone technology. “We are building the technology to give anyone the power to share anything they want with anyone else,” Zuckerberg said as he unveiled the company’s 10-year road map . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The 10-year road map Zuckerberg unleashed places the company on top of what is currently the most exclusive technology. According to Business Insider: The 10-year game involves more ambitious technology efforts, such as artificial intelligence, virtual reality, and augmented reality, and new connectivity offerings, such as drone-delivered internet service. Within the next three years, Facebook’s primary focuses will be making revenue within Facebook’s realm, involving video, messaging and photo sharing. In addition, Zuckerberg revealed “Messenger Platform,” a tool for app developers to create intelligent chatbots for users to interact with businesses through Facebook Messenger. “To order flowers on 1-800-Flowers, you never have to call 1-800-Flowers again,” Zuckerberg said according to USA Today . Reach PublicSource intern Sabrina Bodon at sbodon@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Technology