Adobe stock images. (Illustration by Natasha Vicens) Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource seeks audience participation in newsroom survey Our Pittsburgh nonprofit newsroom is working on a strategic plan, which will create a roadmap for PublicSource through 2028. Help us define our future by taking our audience survey. by Public Source May 18, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Many newsrooms focus on reacting and rushing to publish the news as quickly as they can. As you can probably tell, PublicSource operates a bit differently. While we keep a close eye on day-to-day happenings, we lead with a proactive approach to the issues facing our region. Click here to take our audience survey. We take that same approach when it comes to our newsroom’s future. We’re excited to share that we’re developing a new strategic plan. Over the next six months to a year, we’ll be building a roadmap for PublicSource through 2028. We’re proud of how far we’ve come since our start in 2011, and there’s so much potential for us to create impact and help our region thrive in the coming years. There are many important things to consider as part of this process: What does growth and scale look like for our organization? What services or products should we provide to our region and our field? What type of journalism is best aligned with the needs of our community? How can we make sure we have the resources needed to do this work? We’ll be working to answer these questions with input from our board of directors, our staff and all the people who support us in various ways, from reading and sharing our work to financially supporting it and beyond. We strongly encourage you to participate in this survey and tell us about your local information needs. Take our survey. Check out our impact Pittsburgh’s Public Source journalism informs, influences and creates change Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , Pittsburgh , survey