Posted in Equity , HEALTH , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY A juvenile’s brain on isolation by Halle Stockton July 1, 2014 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Solitary confinement can be detrimental for inmates of any age, but the developing brains of juveniles make them especially vulnerable to long-lasting mental health problems, according to an article in The Atlantic . It wreaks profound neurological and psychological damage, causing depression, hallucinations, panic attacks, cognitive deficits, obsessive thinking, paranoia, anxiety, and anger. Boston psychiatrist Stuart Grassian wrote that “even a few days of solitary confinement will predictably shift the [brain impulse] pattern towards an abnormal pattern characteristic of stupor and delirium.” The story was prompted by a report released by the American Civil Liberties Union, entitled, “Alone & Afraid: Children held in solitary confinement and isolation in juvenile detention and correctional facilities.” About 70,000 juveniles are detained on any given day in the United States, according to the ACLU report, which compiled its findings from a variety of government and private-sector sources. More than 10 years ago, 35 percent of detained juveniles had been held in solitary confinement, and half of them had been isolated for more than 24 consecutive hours. Those 2003 figures were the most recent survey data made available by the Department of Justice to the authors of the ACLU report. The ACLU concluded: Laws, policies, and practices must be reformed to ensure that more effective, safer alternatives are utilized with children in the juvenile system, and that our priority is their proper protection and rehabilitation. The Atlantic reports that no states ban the use of solitary confinement for children in adult facilities and only a few states limit it in juvenile facilities. For teenagers and even inmates in their 20s, the isolation can threaten the parts of their brains that make plans and determine what actions to take as well as those portions that control impulses. “The experience of isolation is especially frightening, traumatizing, and stressful for juveniles,” he [Craig Haney, a professor of psychology at the University of California Santa Cruz] said. “These traumatic experiences can interfere with and damage these essential developmental processes, and the damage may be irreparable.” Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Care of children and elderly , Criminal Justice , Overlooked communities , State oversight of health and welfare systems , Vulnerable populations Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton