Posted in Education , IN-DEPTH Single-sex classrooms: the Westinghouse experiment by Martha Rial November 2, 2011 November 16, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Photography and audio by Martha Rial | Additional audio by Emily DeMarco | Photographs © Martha Rial 2011 *UPDATE 2/16/2012: The short-lived experiment at Westinghouse High School is chronicled here by Pulitzer Prize winning photographer Martha Rial. Students talked about their experiences in September and October, 2011, when they were in the midst of the changes. The historic Westinghouse High School in Pittsburgh opened this fall as an academy with single-gender classes. Its students attend longer classes, go to school more days and focus on leadership, as well as the traditional subjects. The building teems with energy as students in white shirts and khaki pants, their daily uniforms, walk the halls. As for the hotly debated single-sex classes, the Pittsburgh Public School Board voted in November to end them after only three months. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Care of children and elderly , Economy Martha Rial _migrated-47-martha-rial@example.com Martha Rial is an independent photographer based in Pittsburgh. She previously worked as a staff photographer for the St Petersburg Times and her hometown paper, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Rial was awarded... More by Martha Rial