Posted in Equity Law on cameras in nursing homes and what to do if you want one by Alexandra Kanik December 15, 2015 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pennsylvania does not have a law on cameras in nursing homes. The state defaults to federal guidelines that protect the dignity and privacy of nursing-home residents, but they do not address the use of cameras. If you want the state to address this one way or the other, contact: Your local ombudsman program or the state ombudsman. Here’s a list of contact information by county . Wilmarie Gonzalez, the state long-term care ombudsman, can be reached at 717-783-8975. Your lawmakers. Find your legislators by your address or county here . Industry associations, like LeadingAge PA or the Pennsylvania Health Care Association . Advocacy groups, like the Center for Advocacy for the Rights and Interests of the Elderly at 215-545-5728 or the Disability Rights Network of Pennsylvania at (717) 236-8110. If you are interested in installing a camera for communication or monitoring, and you want to know how your loved one’s nursing home handles the issue: Talk to an administrator about your concerns. Ask for a copy of facility rules and regulations. Join the family council and urge your loved one to participate in the resident council. Know that there are no state laws against the use of video recording, but audio without consent of all parties is illegal in Pennsylvania. It is suggested that you inform the facility administrator of any cameras and obtain consent from both the resident and any roommates. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Aging , Care of children and elderly , Disabilities , Resource , Vulnerable populations