Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY McLay on DNC speech: No, it wasn’t a political endorsement for Hillary Clinton by Jeffrey Benzing July 27, 2016 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X After taking the stage in a prime-time speaking slot at the Democratic National Convention, Pittsburgh Police Chief Cameron McLay said he was giving no political endorsement. It was simply a chance to talk about police reform on a national stage, he said, even if some officers, including the bureau’s union president, saw it as an ethical violation. After controversial fatal shootings by police of black men in Minnesota and Louisiana and the subsequent killing of eight officers in the aftermath, McLay said he’s seen increased polarization between police and critical residents. “I’ve been frustrated about having a hard time getting my message out there,” McLay told reporters today in Pittsburgh. “That the way through this, through these difficult times, is for us to all come together.” So when the DNC offered a national stage, he saw it as an opportunity to reach an audience “where no one can shut the mic off on me.” McLay’s text hits on themes he’s addressed before and acknowledges distrust many residents feel toward police. From the speech: As a police officer that has served for more than 30 years, let me say this: We can respect and support our police officers while also pushing for important reforms. We can and must do both. Meanwhile, Robert Swartzwelder, president of the Fraternal Order of Police Fort Pitt Lodge 1, said he saw the speech as effectively endorsing Hillary Clinton, who last night became the Democratic Party’s official nominee for president. Indeed, Democratic speechwriters saw McLay’s words beforehand and shortened them to fit a 480-word limit, McLay said. However, he said the words were all his own. His expenses (a flight and one night in a hotel) were also paid. Last night, the FOP’s official twitter had blunt criticism . Pittsburgh Police Standards of Conduct and Municipal Code expressly prohibit political activity in uniform hmmmm!!! https://t.co/hcAJMyRwQ4 — PittsburghPolice FOP (@foplodge1pgh) July 27, 2016 Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting City code does prohibit officers from campaigning for candidates while on duty or in uniform. “Anyone who believes in any way, shape or form that the DNC is not a political campaign is an idiot,” Swartzwelder said, according to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . McLay, however, said he was not acting politically and that any officer could speak publicly exactly as he did after receiving his permission. Officers would only run afoul of regulations, McLay said, if they did not seek prior approval. Both Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto and Public Safety Director Wendell Hissrich supported McLay’s decision to talk, he said. The chief said he received positive feedback last night and became aware of grumblings from officers this morning. Kevin Acklin, the mayor’s chief of staff, said there was no violation of city code. It’s worth noting that while McLay did not appear at the Republican National Convention in Cleveland last week, he also wasn’t asked. “Had I been invited to speak at the Republican National Convention, I would have jumped on it,” McLay said. “I would have loved that opportunity.” Reach Jeffrey Benzing at jbenzing@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @jabenzing . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice