Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 7, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 7, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Mayor commits to resiliency plan Mayor Bill Peduto signed a pledge to allot 10 percent of Pittsburgh’s operating and capital budgets to set up support and infrastructure in the event of climate or economic problems. The resiliency plan will address flooding concerns, crumbling bridges and cold weather response. It will also allow the city to open a $5 million stream of funds from the Rockefeller Foundation. Pittsburgh: Pennsylvania’s first milk bank Expected to open its doors in November in the Strip District, the Three Rivers Mothers’ Milk Bank is now accepting donations. It will serve Pennsylvania and West Virginia residents with pumped breast milk for nursing mothers with premature babies. Pittsburgh: MLB Wild Card game Tonight the Pirates face off against the Chicago Cubs in the National League Wild Card game. The winner will go on to play the St. Louis Cardinals. Will Buctober continue? The game starts at 8 p.m. at PNC Park and will be broadcast on TBS and ESPN Radio. Nazareth: School district lockdown Nazareth Area School District near Allentown locked down three schools after a fired substitute teacher, allegedly disgruntled, showed up at the district’s middle school. The schools remained in lockdown for about 40 minutes, until the teacher was found and taken into custody. Harrisburg: Hearing concludes between UPMC and Highmark The state Supreme Court held a hearing that reviewed a contract dispute between the two companies. Although it hasn’t issued a ruling, it will determine whether UPMC is obligated to treat Highmark’s Medicare Advantage patients at in-network rates . Statewide: What state prison inmates eat Inmates receive 2,500 calories a day based on the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics’ diabetic diet. The menus cycle every four weeks. NATIONAL Justice Department will free 6,000 prisoners In order to reduce overcrowding and relieve non-violent drug offenders with harsh sentences, the Justice Department will grant early release to 6,000 prisoners — the largest group ever to be released at one time. Dams breached in South Carolina Flooding Since the severe flooding this weekend, 18 dams failed or breached and are responsible for nearly 300 road and 166 bridge closures. Damages are expected to reach more than $1 billion . Colleges consider demand for ‘comfort animals’ Colleges and universities across the country are facing increased requests regarding animals living on campus.  Domesticated animals have proven to be a stress reliever for students with diagnosed mental illnesses, but allergies and phobias are still an issue. IN OTHER NEWS The higher the credit score the better the marriage A new research paper by the Federal Reserve Board found that the higher the credit score the more likely people are going to find and maintain a committed relationship. Compatibility, in this case, refers to how well couples’ credit scores match. Mobile ad costs — time and money The New York Times examined the costs and load times of data on 50 major news websites. More than half of all data comes from ads, and they also take time to load. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman and Christine Manganas, PublicSource interns. You can reach them with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org and cmanganas@publicsource.org Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI