Posted in HEALTH Scenes from Pittsburgh abortion rights rallies this week following Roe V. Wade leak, more planned The March to Defend the Right to Abortion is scheduled for 7 p.m. on Fri., May 6 at the City County Building in Downtown Pittsburgh. by Pittsburgh City Paper May 6, 2022 September 7, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photo by Jared Wickerham/Pittsburgh City Paper) This story was originally published by Pittsburgh City Paper , a news partner of PublicSource. About 150 people gathered in Downtown Pittsburgh on May 3 to protest the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe V. Wade, a plan first revealed by Politico in a leaked draft opinion and later confirmed by the court. Pittsburgh advocates and groups including Women’s March-Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh’s section of the National Council of Jewish Women, and Planned Parenthood of Western Pennsylvania organized Tuesday’s Bans Off Our Bodies Rally, joining national protests across the country, with plans for more local events later this week. Read more: Archive: Here’s what it’s like to be an abortion clinic escort in Pittsburgh The March to Defend the Right to Abortion, organized by various groups including the Abortion Defense Committee, Justice for Jim Rogers, and the Revolutionary Women’s Study Group PGH, is scheduled for 7 p.m. on Fri., May 6 at the City County Building in Downtown Pittsburgh. Black- and trans-led nonprofit SisTers PGH also announced a rally at Freedom Corner in the Hill District for Sat., May 7. (Photo by Jared Wickerham/Pittsburgh City Paper) (Photo by Jared Wickerham/Pittsburgh City Paper) (Photo by Jared Wickerham/Pittsburgh City Paper) Story and photos by Jared Wickerham for Pittsburgh City Paper . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: abortion rights , health , leadstorynoshow