Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 27, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 27, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pennsylvania Pittsburgh: McKeesport teacher charged in sexual assault case Michelle Mellinger, a special education teaching assistant at McKeesport High School, has been charged with having sex with four students between the ages of 15 and 17. The charges include institutional and statutory sexual assault as well as corruption of minors and unlawful contact with minors. Pittsburgh: Port Authority considering additional transit service The continuing fall in gas prices prompted Port Authority to begin reviewing formal requests for additional transit services to begin next year. Lower prices have meant remaining funding. York: Hospital warns of possible exposure to infection Eight patients, four who later died, at the WellSpan York Hospital were apparently infected by contaminated water that formed in the heating-cooling devices used with bypass machinery. The Food and Drug Administration issued alerts about the devices earlier this month. The hospital recently sent 1,300 letters to patients who may have been exposed. Philadelphia: SEPTA proposes power with Marcellus Shale gas The region’s mass transit agency proposed a new natural gas power plant to generate energy for the commuter rail system. The $26.8 million project would serve regional rail lines and a large bus depot. McCandless: Cement to wetland Residents are deciding whether or not to turn a 27-acre area of asphalt into wetlands . The Allegheny Land Trust proposed the purchase at the northern end of McKnight Rd., where there is now a closed movie theater. The McCandless land-use administrator said the project would help to lessen flooding. Statewide: PA State Police struggle to recruit High levels of retirement within the State Police system have left recruiters struggling to find good applicants. Candidates applying to join the police is at an all-time low, as the number of on-the-job incidents and officers charged with crimes increases. National Processed meat may be a cause of cancer The World Health Organization (WHO) announced Monday that eating processed meats, such as bacon and hot dogs, and unprocessed red meats cause cancer . The cancer research unit for WHO said that meat can be linked specifically to colon cancer. FBI understates number of police fatalities in high-speed chases The Federal Bureau of Investigation counted only 24 deaths of police officers from high-speed chases since 1980, but records showed more than 360, 15 times the FBI’s count. The understatement stems from the FBI labeling a majority of the cases as automobile accidents. Ole Miss lowers the state flag The University of Mississippi removed its state flag Monday after the student government, faculty and staff voted that the school take it down because it incorporates the Confederate battle emblem. Mississippi is the only state flag that includes a confederate emblem or imagery. World Earthquake kills more than 215 in Afghanistan An earthquake jolted northeastern Afghanistan Monday and more than 215 are dead across the region. Officials are bracing for more casualties. The earthquake had a preliminary magnitude of 7.5 and was centered in an area of the Hindu Kush mountains. In Other News Restaurant offers discount to gun owners After a robbery at Papa Roux, a Cajun restaurant in Indianapolis, the owner is offering a 25 percent discount to customers with licenses to carry legal handguns. The owner stated that the new decision is meant to ensure that his business is not an easy target. The Daily Report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions and suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI