Posted in Environment After record rain fell in Pittsburgh, we want to know how you were affected April showers got you dour? If the historically wet (so far) start to 2024 has dampened your plans, PublicSource wants your story. by Stephanie Mirah and Rich Lord April 15, 2024 April 15, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X People walk through the sleet along the Penn Avenue arts and commercial district on Friday, April 5, 2024, in Bloomfield. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Record rainfall in the Pittsburgh area has closed roads and trails, flooded basements and led to a series of emergency rescues. PublicSource wants to know how a historically wet (so far) start to 2024 has affected you. Send us a blurb, a picture or a video (or all 3), let us know who you are for verification, and we may publish yours with other accounts. The form: Name (Required) Your location, neighborhood or municipality: (Required) How has record rainfall affected you? Send us a photo, video or both. Drop files here or Select files Max. file size: 2 GB. Optional: Share your contact information if you're open to a reporter reaching out. Δ Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , Climate , environment , leadstorynoshow , Pittsburgh , rainfall Stephanie Mirah stephaniemirah@publicsource.org Stephanie Mirah is the audience growth and engagement producer for PublicSource. In her role, she will continue to cultivate relationships with current PublicSource readers and subscribers while seeking... More by Stephanie Mirah Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord