About PublicSource About us | Team | Impact | Awards | Get involved | Support for our work | Board | Partners | Inside our Newsroom PublicSource is Pittsburgh’s home for impactful journalism and community-driven storytelling. Our dedicated team of journalists is committed to demystifying the issues that matter most to our readers. We champion transparency and accountability from those who are in power. Our fact-checked local news spans critical topics, including the environment, health, education, community development and local government. Through in-depth reporting and analysis alongside diverse perspectives, our nonprofit, nonpartisan news organization serves and engages the people of Southwestern Pennsylvania. We strive to empower our audience with the knowledge and understanding needed to make informed decisions and drive positive change, on a personal level and within broader systems. Our team PublicSource team members are embedded in the Pittsburgh region, collaborating to provide deeply reported news and to ensure our journalism can stay free and accessible to all. Meet our team and find email addresses for each here . Impact At PublicSource, we believe local journalism has the power to help citizens improve their communities and their lives, access resources, advocate for their needs and support their neighbors. Good journalism facilitates these actions. Our definition of impact is broad. We consider impact to be any way that our journalism does good or creates change. Our impacts have included helping members of the CMU community contribute to public discussion about facial recognition policy on campus, bringing attention to deplorable conditions in housing owned by the region’s largest bank and breaking news about failures within the Pittsburgh housing authority , leading to changes in the Section 8 program. Learn more about how our journalism has affected your neighborhood, city and county. And, if our journalism has impacted you, we’d love to know. Tell us about it by completing this short form . Awards The PublicSource staff has been recognized in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and across the United States for producing high-quality local journalism. 3 Edward R. Murrow Awards Online News Association General Excellence Award in 2020 & 2021 | 9 ONA OJA nominations 40 Keystone State Society for Professional Journalists awards 5 Mid-Atlantic Emmys Get involved High-quality journalism relies on people like you to make it possible and sustainable. There are many ways you can get involved: Have a tip or story to tell? Let us know. Want news sent directly to your inbox? Sign up for our three free newsletters. Follow us on social platforms. Navigate Pittsburgh and Allegheny County happenings with our local events page . PublicSource offers speaking engagements and classes on topics related to journalism and storytelling. Contact info@publicsource.org if your group is interested in scheduling. Package deals may be negotiated and scholarships are available. Support our work As a nonprofit, PublicSource relies on community members, local businesses and philanthropic organizations to ensure this journalism can continue. Like PublicSource, our supporters share the goal of making Pittsburgh the best place that it can be and they recognize how essential quality local journalism is to this pursuit. When you join them by making a tax-deductible contribution, you give our newsroom the resources needed to create impactful journalism. Support this work with a gift today. Learn more about who supports PublicSource. Manage your existing donation and other giving FAQs. Reach our local community through ads or sponsorships. Board The PublicSource Board of Directors is composed of leaders in journalism, business and the Pittsburgh community who give of their time and knowledge to support the strategic and financial direction of the organization. Meet our board of directors . Partners PublicSource believes in collaboration for the common good, and it’s part of our mission to ensure people have access to meaningful journalism. That’s why we make our work available for republishing and work with other news organizations to produce the highest quality local journalism you can find. We frequently collaborate with 90.5 WESA, NEXTPittsburgh, Pittsburgh City Paper, Pittsburgh Magazine and others. And you’ll regularly see our stories in the New Pittsburgh Courier, Kidsburgh and Technical.ly. Interested in republishing one of our stories? Learn how. Inside our Newsroom Through our occasional Inside our Newsroom posts , you will learn about our approach to journalism and how we’re working to ensure a healthy and sustainable future for local news and the communities we serve.