Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource wins two national Edward R. Murrow Awards by Halle Stockton August 12, 2022 August 12, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Clairton High School graduates toss their caps in the air outside of the Clairton Education Center on June 9, 2021. PublicSource was honored with two national Edward R. Murrow awards for reporting by a small digital news organization, announced during the Radio Television Digital News Association’s national broadcast on Aug. 11. PWSA: After the Crisis , by Oliver Morrison, received the Murrow award for a News Series. This 12-part series provides the fullest account of Pittsburgh’s water crisis, what it means for the future and what vulnerabilities still exist for Pittsburgh’s water supply. This series continues to be used to help inform the future. The City of Prayer: Clairton’s Residents Persevere Amid Persistent Pollution and Violence , by Quinn Glabicki, received the Feature Reporting award. In this project, portraits of illness, trauma, advocacy and resilience, often set against the literal backdrop of the U.S. Steel coke works’ plumes, offer a well-rounded perspective on the complex nature of life in Clairton, a town grappling with its legacy and urgent problems like poor air quality and gun violence. Among the most prestigious awards in news, the Murrow Awards recognize local and national news stories that uphold the RTDNA Code of Ethics, demonstrate technical expertise and exemplify the importance and impact of journalism as a service to the community. Murrow Award-winning work demonstrates the excellence that Edward R. Murrow made a standard for the broadcast news profession. The full list of national honorees can be found here . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton