Posted in Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh wants to know more about housing shortage, Allegheny County administration PublicSource invited readers to review last year’s news, vote on storylines and suggest new areas of coverage. Here are the results. by Stephanie Mirah and Rich Lord January 3, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X If scrolling through 2024 news left you with the impression that the election was the only thing going, then the results of PublicSource’s reader outreach may shock you. Readers were invited to review the major storylines reflected in PublicSource’s coverage, cast votes for must-follow topics and suggest areas for coverage in the new year. Seventy people weighed in. While the voting instructions indicated only one vote per question, some readers selected more than one storyline, and in the interest of democracy, we’re reflecting all of their choices here. As for that presidential election, which famously closed with dueling Pittsburgh-area rallies by Republican nominee Donald Trump and Democratic nominee Kamala Harris — it got a fistful of votes. But far more readers valued local coverage. Which 2024 storyline was your favorite? Winner: The Innamorato effect Around one in three readers highly appreciated coverage of Allegheny County Executive Sara Innamorato , who was inaugurated after a campaign focused on inclusion, had to contend with the housing and shelter crisis, and ended the year by raising property taxes to keep services intact. Close second: Housing shortage endures With the number of people in shelters or living on the streets sometimes topping 1,000 in the county, readers were glad for deep coverage of emergency facilities and affordability efforts . Runners-up: LGBTQ folks targeted in a contentious election season in which the GOP took on trans rights Environmental efforts extended, chronicling the region’s efforts to get greener The PPS plunge, exploring Pittsburgh Public Schools’ responses to enrollment dips Immigration’s promise, challenges — Pittsburgh’s takes on the nation’s migration issues Which other storyline would you like to sit and have a drink with? Americans are famously said to choose candidates based in part on who they’d like to have a beer with. Asked which storyline they’d share a beverage with, around 20% of the PublicSource audience pulled up a chair next to the housing shortage or the Innamorato effect, with smaller-but-significant numbers winking across the bar at the environment and immigration — among the favorite storylines indicated above. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Other storylines toasted by readers: Jail care unbound, chronicling the use of medication-assisted treatment in the county lockup History shadows housing, connecting past discrimination and enduring segregation North Side buzz — development and gentrification concern from East Allegheny to Manchester Which storyline are you particularly keen on following in 2025? Unsurprisingly, readers want more on housing, the county administration, the environment, schools and immigration. Also on the watch list: Grant Street penury, or: the tough fiscal choices facing Mayor Ed Gainey and Innamorato University billions, on the endowments of the University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon Other storylines people want in 2025 Twenty participants suggested topics they’d like to see explored this year, ranging from the fairly obvious to the delightfully niche. Areas of interest: Robotics and other tech, how enterprises are funded and why great ideas sometimes fizzle How race and disability intersect in an uneven and ableist society The 2025 race for mayor of Pittsburgh LGBTQ issues and trans rights , including debunking false assumptions Tensions — especially on campuses — involving allegations of Islamophobia and antisemitism Vacant homes, tiny houses , and how they could help with the affordable housing shortage Climate change , who is addressing it, and who is hindering progress Transit , cycling, pedestrian safety and other alternatives to the auto Labor organizing in Southwestern Pennsylvania Comprehensive planning in the city and county, and how it could affect climate efforts Message received! Thanks for your input and readership. Stephanie Mirah is the audience growth and engagement producer with PublicSource. She can be reached at stephaniemirah@publicsource.org . Rich Lord is PublicSource’s managing editor and can be reached at rich@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , Allegheny County administration , housing shortages , Pennsylvania , Pittsburgh Stephanie Mirah stephaniemirah@publicsource.org Stephanie Mirah is the audience growth and engagement producer for PublicSource. In her role, she will continue to cultivate relationships with current PublicSource readers and subscribers while seeking... More by Stephanie Mirah Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord