Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts PA education adviser resigns in the wake of reports saying he did little work by Alexandra Kanik August 14, 2014 June 12, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Photo by Penn State / flickr Ron Tomalis, the governor’s special adviser on higher education, said Wednesday that he will resign from his post. Tomalis became a cabinet-level adviser to Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Corbett after resigning as the state’s education secretary in June 2013. He kept the same salary, nearly $140,000 plus benefits, that he earned as secretary. The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette recently reported there was little proof Tomalis did any work at all. The newspaper submitted a Right-to-Know request for Tomalis’s work calendar, phone logs and emails. From the Post-Gazette: The records produced included a work calendar showing weeks with little or no activity, phone logs averaging barely over a phone call a day over 12 months and a total of five emails produced by Mr. Tomalis. Acting Secretary of Education Carolyn Dumaresq said the state could produce only a few emails because department’s employees purge their emails every night. “There’s no email trail for a lot of folks. I couldn’t possibly store all of my email; we delete and cleanse each evening, so that’s why there’s no emails,” Ms. Dumaresq told Harrisburg television station WHTM. This is in violation of the state’s records retention policy, which details the minimum amount of time documents must be kept. Standing behind his former education secretary, Corbett said Tomalis was not a ghost employee . “He’s been doing the work. She’s (Dumaresq) satisfied with it. I’m satisfied with it,” he said. Tomalis will leave office Aug. 26. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Employment