Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 8, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 9, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Highmark preliminary plan for Allegheny Health falls short in specifics Highmark Health submitted a preliminary plan to lend $175 million to Allegheny Health Network, but the Pennsylvania Insurance Department said the plan needs more detail about how the hospital system will improve its finances. Pittsburgh: A link between sleep and health A University of Pittsburgh researcher was part of a recent study that compared the amount of sleep a person gets to their chances of catching a common cold. The results found that people with six hours of sleep or fewer a night are four times more likely to get a cold. Harrisburg: Lawmakers consider stopgap budget plan Legislative leaders say they will attempt to pass a stopgap budget to fund state government for several months while budget negotiations continue between Gov. Tom Wolf and the Republican-controlled legislature. Shamokin: Teachers on strike in Northumberland County Shamokin Area School District teachers, who haven’t had a contract in almost three years, are on strike with no clear return date. Teachers are seeking a higher starting salary, and in return will pay more for health insurance. Statewide: PSSA scores waived from upcoming measurement of school performance Gov. Tom Wolf announced a one-year pause in using the Pennsylvania System of School Assessment tests in the state’s School Performance Profile score. This waiver follows a decline in PSSA scores, officials said, although scores have not yet been released. NATIONAL Hillary Clinton apologizes for e-mail arrangement Hillary Clinton told an interviewer Tuesday that her use of a private e-mail system while she was secretary of state was “a mistake.” After telling the Associated Press on Monday that she would not apologize, she now says she is “sorry.” Baltimore reached settlement with family of Freddie Gray Baltimore officials reached a $6.4 million wrongful death settlement with the family of Freddie Gray , the 25-year-old who died in police custody in April after suffering a spinal cord injury. The civil settlement has no bearing on the trial of six police officers in the case. Pope Francis announces revisions to the process of annulment Pope Francis announced revisions to the process of the annulment of marriages Tuesday that will make the action cheaper and quicker. The process will now be free, will eliminate the requirement of a second review by a cleric and, in some cases, will give bishops the ability to grant an annulment themselves. Kim Davis released from jail after gay marriage dispute Rowan County clerk Kim Davis , who defied a court order by refusing to issue marriage licenses to gay couples, was freed after spending five days in jail. Judge David L. Bunning warned Davis that she must not interfere in the future with her deputy clerks who issue the licenses. Patriots ‘Spygate’ scandal resurfaces ESPN released a report claiming that the New England Patriots “Spygate” scandal, in which the team was caught in 200 8 filming six opponents games and practices to learn plays, now includes filming 40 games from 2000-2007. The report alleges they had handwritten diagrams of the Pittsburgh Steelers’ defensive signals.The Patriots denied the allegations. IN OTHER NEWS Robo-restaurant requires no personal interaction Customers order, pay and receive their food without talking to a single worker at a quinoa restaurant called Eatsa in San Francisco. There are unseen cooks preparing the food, but there are plans to fully automate that process to avoid the cost of employing people. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI