Posted in Daily report , posts June 13, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 13, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Allegheny County and Allegheny Health Network to collaborate On Friday, county Executive Rich Fitzgerald announced that the two would combine to manage the medical services at Allegheny County Jail. They hope to improve the overall safety of the inmates. Pittsburgh: Innovators take playbook to national audience The Sprout Fund , a Pittsburgh nonprofit that supports grassroots projects, took tools designed by the Children’s Museum, Carnegie Mellon’s Create Lab and Elizabeth Forward School District to the National Maker Faire at the University of the District of Columbia, an event that promotes creativity over consumption. Philadelphia: Maternal mortality higher than national average Philly’s maternal mortality rate is about 50 percent above the average, with the majority attributed to natural causes related to childbirth. Poverty, violence and addiction had an effect on the mothers’ health, according to the study. Western Pennsylvania: GE Transportation financed through Export-Import bank GE Transportation will build 100 locomotives in Erie and Grove City and then sell them in Angola for $350 million, thanks to financing from the national Export-Import bank. However, it could be one of the bank’s last deals, as its charter expires June 30 unless it goes up for reauthorization in Congress. Statewide: Takeaways from the EPA’s study on fracking Although the study claims that fracking doesn’t cause widespread problems, there is still evidence of contaminated drinking water . Results could also be skewed because there are few baseline tests, so how, where and when the water gets contaminated is still largely unknown. Statewide: Obtaining lethal injection drugs While other states have sparked national controversy on their less-than-legal means to acquire the drugs, Pennsylvania Corrections Secretary John Wetzel said the state doesn’t have the drugs to perform a lethal injection, and he anticipates difficulty in procuring them when the time comes. NATIONAL One in five college women experience sexual assault A Washington Post -Kaiser Family Foundation poll found that one in five women have been violated in the last four years on a college campus. Overall, a quarter of women and seven percent of men report they’ve experienced an assault in college. Baltimore’s broken relationship with law enforcement At least 55 people have been murdered in Baltimore since May 1 in dangerous neighborhoods that have experienced a diminished police presence. The citizens are calling for better policing. House Democrats reject key proponent of trade bill President Obama’s global trade agenda suffered a setback Friday. It was the House Democrats who punted the bill, and House Republicans indicated they may try to get it back on track next week. ‘Angola 3’ prisoner’s release blocked A federal appeals court has blocked the court-ordered immediate release of Albert Woodfox , a former Black Panther leader who’s been in solitary confinement since 1972. He was twice convicted of the murder of a prison guard, but both convictions were overturned. IN OTHER NEWS Four things ‘Game of Thrones’ can learn from American economics Tomorrow is the season finale of the HBO show : Four top economists outline ways that Westeros and the Seven Kingdoms could improve their cash flow. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI