Posted in On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY U.S. crime has dropped drastically since the early 1990s. But why? by Jeffrey Benzing April 18, 2016 February 20, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X It’s plain fact that violent crime plummeted since the early 1990s. It’s also true that there’s little agreement on why. Was it economics? Better policing? Mass incarceration? As The Atlantic examined on Friday , researchers have offered explanations that on their face seem plausible, only to be whittled down by caveats, and so the explanations seem to lead to more questions. Take the policing theory. The thought here is that crime decreased because of law enforcement policies, like the emphasis on “broken windows” policing to crack down on lower level crimes in New York City. Murders in the city had surged to 2,245 deaths in 1990. They dropped 75 percent a decade later, according to The Atlantic . Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani credited the police, led by Commissioner William Bratton, for the drop in violence. But Giuliani took office in 1994. Crime started dropping in 1990, experts say, and the decline was by no means limited to New York. From The Atlantic : What turned into a precipitous decline started later in some areas and took longer in others. But it happened everywhere: in each region of the country, in cities large and small, in rural and urban areas alike. In the Northeast, which reaped the largest benefits, the homicide rate was halved. Talk of mass incarceration has been a recent fixture on the campaign trail, and along with that, talk of whether locking up violent offenders has any long-term benefits on public safety. While a report from the National Academies did find a possible link, evidence is sketchy and the impact was probably not large, according to the 2012 report. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting In other words, locking up offenders could reduce crime, but it’s difficult to say how much, and data doesn’t explain the size of the drop seen over the past 25 years. As The Atlantic points out, researchers said the threat of lengthy prison sentences, which go hand-in-hand with mass incarceration, have little deterrent effect. If removing criminals from society fixes the problem, doing so also inflicts major damage , particularly in black communities which are disproportionately represented in our prisons. Some researchers say the decrease in crime is tied to the thriving economy of the 1990s. But the impact was again small, according to The Brennan Center for Justice, a public policy institute at the New York University Law School. As the story explains, crime rates were at their lowest in 40 years after the Great Recession hit. There are other theories . Less alcohol. Less lead in the environment . More abortions. What is clear is that the reduction has either an easy explanation no one has hit on in two and a half decades (or conclusively explained), or it has a really complicated explanation. What’s also clear is that many Americans think they are less safe now than they were when crime was high. That isn’t true . Reach Jeffrey Benzing at 412-315-0265 or at jbenzing@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @jabenzing . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice