Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan October 16, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X train Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Feds plan new standards for tracks After finding that a broken rail caused the oil train accident in Mount Carbon, W.V., earlier this year, federal regulators said they’ll issue a safety advisory requesting railroads do more rail inspections and train inspectors more thoroughly. Regulators also announced plans to issue new rail standards, including slowing trains down and requiring rails be replaced if they pose a safety threat. One judge will hear all Amtrak cases in Philly More than 60 personal injury and wrongful death lawsuits have been filed following the disastrous derailment of Amtrak Train 188 in May. A federal court panel announced Tuesday that all of those cases will be heard by U.S. District Judge Legrome D. Davis, which was decided by a panel that organizes lawsuits of a similar nature filed in courts across the country. In 2012, that panel also brought together the thousands of concussion-related lawsuits filed across the U.S. by former NFL players. What will lifting the crude oil export ban mean for the U.S.? Congress is now debating if it should lift a 1970s ban on crude oil exports. Oil producers want the ban lifted so they can sell more oil overseas. Refineries want to keep the ban in place because they can buy cheap crude oil, refine and sell it for a pretty penny elsewhere. Read this story for an easy-to-understand breakdown of the situation. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Canadian railroads cut fees for crude oil shipments Feeling the backlash of a decrease in global oil prices, Canadian rail companies are cutting their rates for shipments of crude oil, according to Reuters. Reach Natasha Khan at sroman@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @ShogunSteph . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan