Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 10, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 11, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Shanksville: New 9/11 memorial to Flight 93 opens A National Memorial Visiting Center opened this week, honoring the 40 passengers and crew members on Flight 93 who fought the plane’s hijackers and died. The $26 million memorial is in the southern tip of Southwestern Pennsylvania, on the border with Maryland. Pittsburgh: County-jail inmate claims he is denied basic human rights Allegheny County ended its contract with Corizon, the former healthcare provider for the county jail, but one inmate still said he has gone weeks without getting treatment for an injury to his ankle. Deven Turner, the inmate in custody, claims that he has properly requested treatment, including written requests and talks with officers on duty, but was still denied treatment. Pittsburgh: Two local universities among Forbes’ top 40 business schools Carnegie Mellon University’s Tepper School of Business claimed the No. 19 spot on the Forbes annual ranking of the nation’s business schools. The University of Pittsburgh’s Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business was at No. 35.  The ranking was based on a poll of the MBA class of 2010. Philadelphia: Bill introduced to require gender-neutral bathrooms A bill regarding gender-neutral bathrooms was introduced in city council Thursday. It would require that the ‘Men’ and ‘Women’ labels be dropped from single-occupant bathroom doors. If passed, Philadelphia would be among the first cities to take the step transgender advocates want. Statewide: Pennsylvania ranked second worst place to have a baby Pennsylvania was ranked one of the worst places to have a baby , according to Wallethub.com’s 2015 study of the best and worst states to have a child. Only Mississippi was worse. Pennsylvania scored low on the numbers of pediatricians, obstetrician-gynecologists and parental-support groups, as well as a scarcity of baby friendly environments. NATIONAL Obama wants to allow Syrian refugees into U.S President Obama told advisors he wants to let 10,000 Syrian refugees into the country in the coming budget year that begins Oct. 1, the White House said. The U.S has accepted roughly 1,500 refugees since the civil war broke out four years ago. White House and NYC prosecutor pledged $79 million towards untested rape kits Forty-one million dollars in federal funds and a $38 million grant awarded to Manhattan District Attorney Cyrus Vance Jr.’s office will be used to clear rape kit backlogs in 27 states, according to the White House. FDA releases new regulations to prevent food poisoning The Food and Drug Administration released its first round of food safety reforms that should help prevent outbreaks of food poisoning before products find their way to the shelves. The new regulations will require companies to have a safety plan to prevent food contamination. Marine Corps study shows all-male infantry outperformed mixed units A Marine Corps evaluation of the effectiveness of integrating women into all jobs found that all-male infantry groups were more powerful as a whole than those that included women. The women also suffered higher injury rates during training. The study is likely to add to the debate about women in ground combat jobs. Motion for change of venue denied for Baltimore officer trials A circuit judge in Baltimore ruled that the six officers charged in the death of Freddie Gray , the 25-year-old black man who suffered a spinal cord injury and died while in police custody, will be tried in the state. The judge denied the defense lawyer’s argument that there was too much publicity and rioting surrounding the case. WORLD New human species found in South African cave Discovery of homo naledi , a new human ancestor, was announced Thursday. The remains were originally found two years ago in the Rising Star Cave outside Johannesburg by cavers. A team of scientists unearthed the remains, which have not yet been dated. IN OTHER NEWS FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Craft beer industry grows in Pittsburgh region Craft breweries and wineries in Pittsburgh are equal to, or even a little ahead of, growth in the industry nationally. Arsenal Cider House in Lawrenceville is just one location contributing to the surge in the city. The daily report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI