Posted in Equity , Local Government , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY A ‘stand your ground’ law for pregnant women by Halle Stockton April 14, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X More than two years after the controversial shooting death of Florida teenager Trayvon Martin, the self-defense law that exonerated his killer is still in the news. This time, South Carolina lawmakers are attempting to expand their stand-your-ground law to give pregnant women the right to use deadly force to protect their unborn children, reports The Post and Courier in Charleston, S.C. Critics argue that the bill is unnecessary because the state already has one of the country’s broadest self-defense laws. But Sen. Chip Campsen, R-Charleston, said sometimes these crimes happen when the boyfriend is trying to harm the unborn child and not necessarily the mother. “I can envision a factual situation where an assault does not rise to the level of great bodily injury, but yet can be effective in killing the unborn child,” Campsen said. Women’s health advocates have voiced concern about the effect the bill’s language might have on abortion because it recognizes an unborn child from conception, according to an article in The State, a Columbia, S.C., newspaper. Marcia Zug, a University of South Carolina law professor, said it is unlikely [the] bill … would provide a strong legal basis for banning abortion because it deals with self-defense, not abortion. “I don’t really think that’s how you’re going to get (abortion banned) … but that’s certainly the purpose,” Zug said. Pennsylvania’s stand-your-ground law, passed in June 2011, is similar to the Florida legislation that was at the center of the Trayvon Martin case, PublicSource reported in March 2012. However, a person claiming self-defense in Pennsylvania cannot be doing something illegal themselves; they must have a reasonable belief that death or serious injury is imminent; and the other person must have displayed or used a lethal weapon. Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Criminal Justice , Overlooked communities Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton