Posted in Daily report , posts June 10, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 10, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: TMK IPSCO to temporarily close for improvements The Ambridge manufacturing plant that provides pipe to shale gas drilling companies will take advantage of the industry slowdown, and will take a month off of production to make $15 million in efficiency improvements. Pittsburgh: Iggy Azalea cancels Pittsburgh Pride performance After prolonged controversy surrounding the rapper’s scheduled appearance at the event, Iggy Azalea announced on Monday evening that she would withdraw from the festival. The organizers have not yet announced her replacement. Harrisburg: Plot to kidnap judge and his wife State prison inmate Anthony Davis is facing solicitation to kidnapping charges. In court on Tuesday, two of Davis’ jailhouse lovers testified against him. One brought in evidence of a detailed and explicit letter on how to kidnap Judge George Zozos’ wife, and if he didn’t have a wife, then the judge himself. Harrisburg: Police chief apologizes to 75-year-old veteran On Memorial Day, a Harrisburg police officer and civilian-clothed Army officer confronted Robert Ford, who was wearing a Marines uniform , and accused him of being a fake. Harrisburg police chief Tom Carter publicly apologized to Ford during a speech about community policing on Monday. Lackawanna County: Judge pushes to adopt personal Breathalyzers Defendants of alcohol-related charges may be required to wear alcohol-monitoring bracelets , but they’re expensive. A proposed change would introduce a cheaper option, hand-held Breathalyzers called Smart Mobiles, that can randomly administer tests. Statewide: Unequal election laws Third parties face difficulty even getting their names on the ballot in Pennsylvania. To get on the general election ballot, they must receive enough signatures to total 2 percent of the total number received by the top vote-getter of a similar office; in some cases, that can mean more than 2,000 signatures. NATIONAL The mentally ill in jail The National Alliance on Mental Illness estimates that 400,000 inmates suffer from mental illness, and that between 25 to 40 percent of all mentally ill people will go to jail at some point in their lives. In Cook County Prison in Chicago, about one in three inmates are mentally ill. Former speaker’s arraignment Dennis Hastert appeared in court Tuesday afternoon, emerging from his recent obscurity following allegations of lying about hush-money payments to a person who accused him of sexual abuse. Hastert has pleaded not guilty. Protests and conflicting narratives in McKinney, Texas On Monday, protesters gathered to march through McKinney , condemning the police officer’s actions against a young girl as racially motivated. But a second narrative claims that the pool party’s DJ played loud music for hours, disrupting the community, and that several teens began fighting with each other, provoking an appropriate reaction from the police. High school graduation rate Officially, it’s at 81 percent , but the number has been inflated by questionable actions in some school districts throughout the nation. Some students are misclassified and removed from the school’s registers. Others make the requirements for graduation easily attainable, but those diplomas may not hold up in college. IN OTHER NEWS Spending $714,000 at the fortuneteller’s A Brooklyn man apparently spent thousands on jewelry and gifts for the fortuneteller who helped him get in contact with an ex-flame, but all it got him was debt, eviction and visits from evil spirits. Mom and cat review daughter’s Amazon purchase The cat modeled the top better than the daughter could have. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.