Posted in DATA , Featured , IN-DEPTH , Investigations , PUBLIC SAFETY , The aftermath of murder Pittsburgh gun crimes: How close to your home are they? by Alexandra Kanik and Natasha Khan November 3, 2016 February 11, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Map updated April 09, 2017. How many gun crimes happened within a mile of your home? Using police data, we built a map that allows you to type in your address and see. Since January 2010, Pittsburgh has had more than 322 gun homicides, 1,250 shootings with an injury and 1,490 gun assaults. Many of these are on the map. But, you should know, a handful of shootings did not have mappable addresses. Those will not appear here. Additionally, police separately tallied more than 17,000 reports of shots fired since August 2010. Because it’s impossible to verify specific addresses for those events, that data has not been included. This map will be updated as new data is available. Please give us your feedback on how to make this more useable, and let us know if any points appear in the wrong location. We’ve vetted it, but you may know better. Email us at web@publicsource.org. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan