Posted in Investigations Allegheny County selected to participate in national fine and fee reform initiative following PublicSource investigation by Juliette Rihl May 26, 2020 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The traffic court cashier window at Pittsburgh Municipal Court in Downtown. Allegheny County is one of 10 locales selected to participate in a national initiative on fine and fee reform. The announcement follows a PublicSource investigation of the impacts of court debt in Allegheny County. There is more than $350 million in unpaid court debt in the county dating back to 1970. For residents who are unable to pay their fines and fees, the implications are severe: nonpayment can result in arrest warrants , driver’s license suspensions and even jail time . As an inaugural member of the Cities & Counties for Fine and Fee Justice , the county was awarded $50,000 to put toward reform efforts. It will work with policy experts and other cohort members over 18 months to develop “bold, innovative solutions,” according to a press release. The program is facilitated by PolicyLink, San Francisco’s Financial Justice Project and the Fines and Fees Justice Center. The county’s involvement in the initiative was spearheaded by County Controller Chelsa Wagner and members of Allegheny County Council. “Criminal infractions require appropriate measures be taken, but should not require years or decades of struggle to afford adequate food, housing, transportation, and health care,” Wagner said in a press release. Allegheny County Council member Bethany Hallam knows firsthand the impact of court debt. She said she has paid tens of thousands of dollars in fines and fees resulting from her past struggle with substance use disorder. “If it weren’t for the consistent and substantial financial support of my family, those fines and fees assessed as a part of my convictions would likely remain unpaid, and my future would have been severely hampered…” she said in a press release. “This is unjust. Our neighbors who do not have the same access to financial resources should not be made to shoulder the burden of an overly extractive criminal legal system.” The county’s Fine and Fee Justice Team will be led by Hallam and Brad Korinski, chief legal counsel in the Office of the County Controller. The other cities and counties selected to participate in the initiative are: Chicago Dallas Durham, North Carolina Philadelphia Providence, Rhode Island Sacramento Seattle/King County Shelby County, Tennessee St. Paul, Minnesota Juliette Rihl is a reporter for PublicSource. She can be reached at juliette@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , county council , court debt , fees , fines , initiative , investigation , national , Pittsburgh , reform Juliette Rihl juliette@publicsource.org Juliette Rihl reports on criminal justice, public safety and mental health for PublicSource. Her 2020 series on how court debt impacts low-income Allegheny County residents prompted the county to join... More by Juliette Rihl