Posted in DEVELOP PGH Plan for Lower Hill concert venue passes crucial step The Planning Commission greenlit the Penguins and their development team to build on more of the former Civic Arena site, passing the contentious proposal to other agencies. by Eric Jankiewicz January 24, 2023 January 26, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Light shines on a parcel known as “Block E” in a much-debated section of the Lower Hill on Monday, Jan. 9, 2023, in Pittsburgh. Decades after the Lower Hill was demolished to build the Civic Arena, plans to redevelop the former site into a music venue have some community members claiming that the Hill is not benefiting enough. (Illustration by Natasha Vicens/PublicSource) Overview: Tuesday’s meeting concluded a series of sometimes contentious meetings over a developer’s application to build a live music venue. People’s ability to objectively assess a situation is limited by their perspective, concluded LaShawn Burton-Faulk, as the City Planning Commission voted to approve development plans for the Lower Hill District despite ongoing community opposition. Develop PGH Your stop for the ins and outs on development and planning in the Pittsburgh region. Explore our coverage . Tuesday’s commission meeting concluded a series of sometimes contentious hearings over a developer’s application to build a live music venue with a small business incubator along with urban open space around Wylie Avenue between Fullerton and Logan Streets. Burton-Faulk, the commission’s vice chair, acknowledged tensions between the developer and some in the community, but noted her organization’s limited ability to address them. “The motion carries and this passes but I’m not excusing people yet. I want us to be careful that we are respectful with the community and the applicant,” Burton-Faulk said. “No party is a hundred percent accurate because it’s about perspective. It’s about fact versus perception.” The commission’s approval of two items related to the development brings the Penguins-picked developer, Buccini/Pollin Group [BPG], one crucial step closer to redeveloping part of the former 28-acre Civic Arena. The developers will now be able to take their plans to the Urban Redevelopment Authority [URA] and the Sports & Exhibition Authority, which own parts of the site and could meet early next month. More Develop PGH stories Job postings are up in Pittsburgh — so why are tech workers still struggling to get hired? Hazelwood rezoning plan sidetracked by railroad concerns Hazelwood waste proposal brings call for ‘environmental justice’ and rezoning MORE STORIES If approved, the plan calls for a 4,600-seat entertainment venue operated by Live Nation, and a parking garage with 900 spaces. The developers estimate construction to total $110 million. BPG is also building the FNB Financial Center nearby. Because the URA cleared homes, businesses and churches to make way for the Civic Arena in the 1950s, the Lower Hill’s redevelopment by the Penguins has spurred demands for Hill-wide benefits. Acknowledging that history, Burton-Faulk urged everyone to “keep communicating.” Her urgings came at the end of an hours-long meeting that saw Hill District community members express skepticism at the developer’s commitment to include the surrounding neighborhood in the expected funds that will be generated by the completed project. The commission also approved changes to the site’s Preliminary Land Development Plan, which included amendments detailing the urban open space. Earlier this month the commissioners decided to reschedule final approval for Tuesday to allow community members time to review updated documents on community benefits from the development. Burton-Faulk said Tuesday that she appreciated the “extra mile” the developers made in working through the approval process. Two weeks earlier the developers, in an effort to assuage community concerns, included a pledge of a $2 surcharge on paid tickets at the proposed music venue for 10 years. Funds from the surcharge would go to the Greater Hill District Neighborhood Reinvestment Fund, which also received $7.18 million when construction began on the FNB Financial Center in September 2021. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Several members of the public complained on Tuesday that the developers didn’t do enough to reach out to the community to share their building plans. Marimba Milliones, president and CEO of the Hill Community Development Corporation [Hill CDC], said that BPG had not fulfilled several promises to the community. Chavaysha Chaney, the Hill CDC’s policy and programs associate, said that BPG “refused to resubmit to the [Development Review Panel] process” after their plans initially failed to meet the Hill panel’s standards. A DRP allows community organizations to weigh in on, and score, a development plan’s merits and benefits. “The Lower Hill Development team didn’t honor the process,” Chaney said. “We asked the BPG and Penguins to support equity and to follow through on their commitment to work with the community instead of sowing division and confusion.” But commission Chair Christine Mondor said that a developer’s lack of participation in a process by a Registered Community Organization like the Hill CDC is beyond the scope of the commission’s authority. “There’s a lot of stuff you’re asking us to mediate and we’re not in a position to do that,” said Mondor. “Development and community can step up and be a part of that. At the end of day we cannot be arbiters of all these issues.” Eric Jankiewicz is PublicSource’s economic development reporter, and can be reached at ericj@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ericjankiewicz . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: development , hill district , leadstorynoshow , Pittsburgh Eric Jankiewicz ericj@publicsource.org Eric Jankiewicz is a reporter focused on housing and economic development for PublicSource. A native New Yorker, Eric moved to Pittsburgh in 2017 and has since fallen in love with his adopted city, even... More by Eric Jankiewicz