Sponsored Learn More PublicSource accepts sponsored content that may be of interest to our readers. The following content was paid for by the author. The Forbes Funds launches initiatives to empower nonprofits to ‘employ’ emergent technology Strategic design and AI programs aim to revolutionize the nonprofit sector — in an affordable, humanity-centered way Sponsored by Greater Pittsburgh Nonprofit Partnership (GPNP) March 11, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Skilly AI sits alongside her human colleagues at The Forbes Funds who trained the software on their language, culture and tone to inform support she provides to members and partners.
(Photo courtesy of Piper Creative) For many nonprofits, the formula for more mission-driven impact has often meant hiring more underpaid people or asking the same people to do more with less. Nonprofits also carry a reputation for being hesitant to adopt whatever the newest technology is. In today‘s world, that’s artificial intelligence, or AI. Despite the allure of emerging technologies, nonprofit leaders may be skeptical and hesitant due to resource constraints, steep learning curves, concerns about disrupting established workflows, and cost-prohibitive nature of accessing tools primarily for the for-profit sector and then adapted for social impact. However, as the landscape of AI, including machine learning, evolves, a compelling argument emerges for nonprofits to embrace both innovation and mission fulfillment. What if technology could be employed strategically to lessen the burden on stressed or burned-out individuals in the social impact sector and create urgency around the support nonprofits need: funding, advocacy and partnership development? Qinyuan Shen from the maad labs and Skillbuilder team attends the 2023 GPNP Summit to speak with nonprofits and partners about generative AI and share the platform. (Photo courtesy of Brett Allen, UwebTV) The Forbes Funds , in collaboration with maad labs and SkillBuilder.io , are introducing three groundbreaking AI and Strategic Design cohorts. These cohorts are designed to empower nonprofits in Southwestern Pennsylvania to navigate the complexities of emergent technology, allowing them to apply concepts such as humanity-centered design and AI tools that have a net-positive effect across the organization. Members of the Greater Pittsburgh Nonprofit Partnership [GPNP] , a program of The Forbes Funds, along with other nonprofits will soon be able to predict emerging needs, allocate staff time and resources more effectively, keep the entire organization more in sync, and engage staff and the communities they serve with AI employees. To be clear, this effort is not just about stretching the overburdened staff with additional tools or apps but rather to extend the voice, tone and culture of the organization with digital coworkers. This looks like AI that listens and supports human colleagues with access to information and methods to fulfill their jobs and also acts as an online conversational experience 24/7 with anyone from donors to volunteers to partners to staff, providing critical information whenever they may want. As these cohorts unfold, they represent a crucial step toward bridging the technology gap, fostering inclusivity and empowering nonprofits to leverage AI for societal good. “With over 66% of GPNP members running organizations with operating budgets under $100,000, it’s extremely important that these tools are accessible and cost is not a barrier,” said GPNP Director Emily Francis. The Forbes Funds will be subsidizing part of the cost of onboarding AI tools for small organizations. Shannah Gilliam, director of the Office of Area Agency on Aging , said participating in the cohort represents a forward-thinking approach to addressing our community’s complex challenges. She emphasized the transformative potential of integrating human-centered techniques and AI technologies into strategic efforts that could use AI to answer common questions, freeing their highly skilled staff to tackle issues better served by person-to-person engagement. “In partnering our teams with tech, the aging services network brings together the best of both worlds. …We can explore new options to enhance our effectiveness, streamline our operations and ensure that our services keep a human touch deeply rooted in the principles of humanity and dignity,” Gilliam said. The initiative encompasses three key cohorts: AI-assisted strategic design: Offering nonprofits a comprehensive approach to tackling complex issues while centering on humanity. Leadership and development (sales) with AI: Upskilling leaders to enhance their persuasive abilities and achieve fundraising goals with AI support. AI development assistance: Guiding organizations in hiring and training AI employees to optimize engagement and efficiency, and improving dialogue with potential funders and partners on how to best contribute to the mission of the organization. Adam Paulisick, founder of SkillBuilder.io and maad labs, underscored the significance of the partnership in democratizing AI technology for nonprofit organizations. Nonprofit, for-profit and government professionals gather for the 2023 GPNP Summit to discuss the intersection of social sector leadership and innovation to foster true co-creation. (Photo courtesy of Brett Allen, UwebTV) “The SkillBuilder.io team is excited to build on our partnership with the Forbes Funds by bringing bias-aware AI to over 2,000 regional nonprofits and social impact member organizations, empowering them to achieve more with less, while preserving the humanity essential to their impactful missions,” he said. “This partnership furthers our commitment to enhancing organizational effectiveness and development through accessible, human-inspired AI based on more than four years of applied research at Carnegie Mellon University .” In addition to the promising advancements facilitated by these programs, the cohorts will address pertinent concerns surrounding AI integration in the nonprofit sector, acknowledging worries about job security, wage implications and data security. By combining strategic design principles with AI leadership and strategy, these initiatives aim to redefine the boundaries of positive change in Southwestern Pennsylvania’s communities. The kickoff for the cohorts is scheduled for April. For more information or to express interest in participating, visit the website or contact emily@forbesfunds.org . Sponsored by Greater Pittsburgh Nonprofit Partnership (GPNP) A growing coalition of over 500 nonprofit organizations leveraging our collective power, together. Learn more about Greater Pittsburgh Nonprofit Partnership (GPNP) Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow , Sponsored