Posted in Daily report , posts The Daily Report: Oct. 19, 2015 by Halle Stockton October 19, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Oct. 19, 2015 PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Greenfield Bridge goodbyes It’s the beginning of the end for the 90-year-old Greenfield Bridge . Local residents celebrated on the bridge over the weekend, in part to show support for the businesses that will be affected by the closure. The $17.5 million replacement is expected to take 18 months to complete. Pittsburgh: Trib’s local papers have a buyer Trib Total Media announced that a Huntingdon, Pa., publishing company will buy two daily newspapers and six weekly publications. The company expects to close the deal by Dec. 31. Pittsburgh: Rally to strengthen animal protections About 100 people with their pets gathered in the North Side on Saturday to support a proposed state law that would create harsher penalties for animal abusers. The law would make animal cruelty a third-degree misdemeanor and repeat offenders could see jail time. Lackawanna County: Discord over power plant proposal The small town of Jessup is split into two camps — those for the natural-gas-fired power plant that could create jobs and those that think it will harm property values and the local economy. Both sides think there will be an effect on the environment, but they differ on whether it would be positive or negative. Allentown: Medical records battle A patient fighting to get her own medical records from a doctor who was treating her for allergies is shedding light on the federal patient privacy law known as HIPAA. Erie: Snow… already It’s not even Halloween yet but the state’s northwestern corner has experienced its first wintry weather . NATIONAL Homeless in Hawaii The tropical state of Hawaii has the highest rate of homelessness per capita in the nation, so much so that the governor has declared a state of emergency. The state is dedicating $1.3 million to create more services and shelters for the homeless. A bite out of Apple A federal jury has sided with the University of Wisconsin-Madison, which filed a lawsuit against the technology giant last year for allegedly infringing on the school’s technology patents. The jury has ordered Apple to pay $234 million, but Apple says it will appeal the decision. Shootings at ZombiCon One man was killed and at least five others wounded in a shooting at a zombie-themed charity event in Fort Myers, Fla., on Saturday. WORLD Typhoon in Philippines About 16,000 people have been displaced in the wake of a typhoon that also took out the electricity and has shut down transportation in and out of the affected villages. News reports have identified two dead from the storm. IN OTHER NEWS Boomers taking over urban living The Boomers are following the Millennial generation to the downtown apartments and condos. And they’re pricing the younger ones out of the market, too. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The daily report was compiled by PublicSource managing editor Halle Stockton. You can reach her with questions at hstockton@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton