Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 30, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 30, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Harrisburg: Gov. Wolf vetoes stopgap budget Fulfilling a promise he made earlier, Gov. Tom Wolf vetoed a GOP-sponsored interim budget , claiming it to be a poor solution to long-term problems. Gov. Wolf is demanding a “real budget,” and said that he is working on a compromise with Republicans. Pittsburgh: The last wooden street Roslyn Place in Shadyside is 250 feet long, but it is the city’s last wooden street. It was built in 1914 out of 26,000 wooden blocks and is designated a Historic Landmark. Pittsburgh: Jeb Bush rolls out energy policy Jeb Bush delivered his energy plan Tuesday at Rice Energy in Canonsburg, calling for lighter regulation of the energy sector and more local control of natural resources. Bush said the plan would stimulate job growth and higher wages. Pittsburgh: ‘Barcade’ in South Side finally reopens After closing in January because of licensing issues, the Victory Pointe cafe reopened last week. It’s a BYOB gaming cafe where patrons can duke it out in pinball machines, arcade classics and console games. Philadelphia: Businesses suffer from papal visit Hotels and restaurants reported significant fiscal losses following the Pope’s visit. Many business owners overestimated the spending power of the hundreds of thousands of visitors. Hotels charging $1,000 a night were left unbooked, and stores were left with stockpiles of uneaten food. Owners believe extreme security measures also factored into the losses. NATIONAL Medicare’s $30 million for ambulance rides unaccounted for Medicare paid $30 million for ambulance transportation, but there are no records that the patients received medical attention at their destination. Philadelphia accompanies New York, Houston and Los Angeles as the top four metro areas responsible for about half of the questionable rides. Planned Parenthood’s president addresses Congress Cecile Richards, president of Planned Parenthood , directly addressed Congress Tuesday regarding speculations that the organization illegally sells fetal tissue for profit. Richards claimed the controversy was a direct result of fraudulent videos released by an anti-abortion group. The hearing focused on whether federal funding should continue for the group. U.S. launches airstrike After a Taliban assault on Kunduz Tuesday, the U.S. military launched an airstrike to help clear the way for Afghan reinforcements. IN OTHER NEWS When a cappuccino is a cappuccino A cappuccino is a drink made with espresso, hot milk and foam.  But experts strongly disagree about the drink’s recipe — Italian-style blends the layers together, but the classic style set by the Specialty Coffee Association of America states the drink needs separate layers. In fact, the New Zealand flat white could be more like a classic cappuccino than a cappuccino. The daily report was compiled by Christine Manganas and Stephanie Roman, PublicSource interns. You can reach them with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org and sroman@pubicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI