Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts One of the secretive big-money forces in Republican politics by Eric Holmberg October 23, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Robert Mercer has been one of the top Republican contributors during the 2014 election, but rarely speaks publicly and is largely an unknown figure. Mercer is the co-CEO of Renaissance Technologies, a hedge fund management company, and his family has a $37.6 million foundation. Bloomberg Politics explored Mercer’s giving, and his foundation’s giving, to political and other causes since 2008. From the story : Mercer has cut checks for a total of $37 million in the past six years, supporting pro-life candidates, those who deny man-made global warming, as well as helping fund the effort to block construction of a mosque near the site of the September 11 attacks in New York. Mercer and his foundation gave more than $20 million to conservative nonprofits, such as the Media Research Center, which “tracks claimed liberal bias in the mainstream media,” according to the story. He also gave nearly $15 million to super PACs (political action committees) such as $2 million to Karl Rove’s American Crossroads and $2.5 million to Charles and David Koch’s Freedom Partners Action Fund. His money also helped fund the 2012 Republican National Convention in Tampa, Fla., to the tune of $1 million. The article also explored his company’s recent appearance before the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations in July. The committee was examining how Renaissance Technologies helped its clients avoid paying certain taxes . From the story : The company was profiled in one chapter of Sebastian Mallaby’s book “More Money Than God,”  which details the world’s most successful hedge funds. In it, Mallaby shared only a few observations about Mercer. “He was an icy cold poker player; he never recalled having a nightmare; his IBM boss jokingly called him an automaton.” Mallaby wrote. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy