Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts PA Fish and Boat Commission wants $1 million to hire officers to check pollution by Natasha Khan July 16, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Did you know the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission has authority to issue citations for Marcellus Shale pollution cases? If you’re answer was no, we’re in the same boat. Well, apparently they do and commission officials told the Pittsburgh Tribune Review that they’re not doing a good job at issuing citations because they’re understaffed. “There are a lot of pollution cases, and we’re not there. But it’s not our fault,” commissioner Bill Sabatose told the newspaper. “We just don’t have the people.” He added that he was “disgusted” by the situation. The commission has called on lawmakers to funnel an additional $1 million for it to hire seven new inspectors for enforcement work, on top of $1 million the commission already receives from Marcellus Shale impact fees. Those funds were used to hire six new inspectors who review gas well permits. More from the Tribune-Review : Officers, who stock fish and perform boating safety patrols among other responsibilities, are investigating only pollution incidents reported to the commission. Oftentimes, by the time they arrive at the remote sites, evidence has been destroyed or washed downstream, he said. “There’s a lot more we could be doing,” [Corey] Brichter said. [Brichter is chief of the commission’s law enforcement bureau.] The commission is recruiting new officers and hopes to begin training cadets next year. But it will take a year for them to be ready for field assignment, the commission said, by which time additional officers may have retired. What the commission needs is a cadre of officers assigned specifically to work Marcellus Shale and pollution cases, said executive director John Arway. He’s hoping state lawmakers will provide them. There’s a possibility that the additional funds for new hires could come from impact fees or the creation of a Marcellus Shale severance tax, according to the article. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan