Being 16: Janae turns to poetry to make art out of struggle By PublicSource June 6, 2017 Janae Dixon, 16, is a junior at Propel Andrew Street High School in Homestead. She is a  poet and a songwriter. For Janae, poetry is an important part of who she is. “Instead of being mad at the world, going around being sad, or taking out my anger on everybody else, I write. Poetry is my outlet,” she said. For five months, PublicSource worked with Janae and other young black women at Propel as part of the “I am a black girl and…” project. When we asked these young women to write a piece that would be illustrative of their lives, Janae shared with us a poem titled “Being 16…”. “Sixteen is the age when you are battling with a lot of things, you are sort of going into adulthood but you are still a child, that’s what the poem is basically about,” she said. One day, Janae hopes to become a record producer like DJ Khaled, writing music and producing her own albums. Being 16… By Janae Dixon You’re 16. What more do they expect from you? You’re far from the usual and not going to school’s not optional Since preteen, you’ve been thrown in this gravity pull: To stay on Earth and live a dream or close your eyes and be with the king whose palace is a heaven’s gates occupied with a new set of wings. But you’re just 16, you too young to understand The battles women face in a world where only things are created by men But if you just stay in a child’s place, they won’t cease to tell you again: Work your way through a day of calculations just to bus a table for a job who don’t value the waitress. You’re 16; you’re a good kid I’d vouch for you… No surprise don’t let’em know that I told you But you’re only 16 what more do they expect from you when you’re only 16… Their Stories Tyneisha continues quest to prove herself as a parent with a disability, but she could still lose her son ‘Young Black Pittsburgh’ ambassadors connect with the girls who shared their stories through letters The vicious cycle inside Allegheny County juvenile court for black girls and their mothers. I saw it up close. Tiara Tabb: In this black-or-white world, I want to find the gray area Jayla Wright: Relationships can tear you down and lift you up. 360 Video: Priya is a teen roboticist interested in how robots can revolutionize medicine Tyneisha thinks her disability shouldn’t disqualify her from motherhood Shaunese Johnson: Schools teach the same black history over and over. Students deserve better. Pittsburgh has a severe shortage of black teachers and that’s hurting black students. Tamia Law: Living in Clairton: ‘Nobody really cares unless it is football’ Getting in the game: Physical activity is a win-win for black girls Pittsburgh’s black girls face lots of inequity barriers. Advocates want tangible change. Corrine Jasmin: They say I’m pretty — for a black girl. Dezmaire gave birth in eighth grade. As a teen mom in Pittsburgh, she’s fighting to beat the odds and graduate. Maia Ervin: I am black, I am a student, and I’m tired of racism on my campus Zoe Vongtau: ‘I hid my accent and culture. I was just always the new black girl.’ She lost her mom and her home. How Monet is finding a promising future in Pittsburgh. 11-year-old Keliyah wants to be a lawyer, sings a special song If everyone got screened, gifted education in Pittsburgh could be more equitable. School officials aren’t sold. When some students are labeled as gifted, I see the harm done to those left behind Who gets to be considered ‘gifted’ in Pittsburgh schools?  Too few black girls. Donise Griffin: Why don’t more students at Pittsburgh’s Gifted Center look like me? Videos: Six women speak about the outlook for black girls in Pittsburgh Do black girls pay a higher price when comprehensive sex education isn’t taught? Amariah Woodson: Racism can be difficult to prove, but I think it happened to me Sienna Rodriguez-Truley: The parts of me that can’t be mixed and matched There are ways to end the school-to-prison pipeline Relive the Gwen’s Girls Equity Summit through what was discussed on social media Gwen’s Girls summit highlights how suspensions derail black girls’ education A story of two girls: Why being black means more scrutiny and punishment in Pittsburgh schools How institutions and society fail Pittsburgh’s black girls