Posted in Daily report , posts Aug. 17, 2015 by Halle Stockton August 17, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Harrisburg: Significant spending by lobbyists Lobbyists have spent $791 million between 2007 and 2015. Spending by interest groups related to health care and Marcellus shale lead the pack. Pennsylvania recently got a ‘C’ grade for its disclosure laws for lobbyists. Allegheny County: Audit finds shortfall Hertz, a rental car agency at the Pittsburgh International Airport, has been told by Allegheny County Controller Chelsa Wagner that it owes $1.8 million to the county. Pittsburgh: Update from the police chief Pittsburgh Police Chief Cameron McLay says data collection, community policing and diversity initiatives have put the department back on track. Erie County: Budget stalemate affecting college students’ financial aid Edinboro University has announced it will provide advance money to students who rely on financial aid from the Pennsylvania Higher Educational Assistance Agency until the state finalizes a budget. Schuylkill County: Construction uncovers mass grave Construction on Route 61 was interrupted when a worker found bones. After further investigation, it was determined the bones were human remains from the 1918 Spanish influenza and that there were likely many more bodies. NATIONAL AT&T tops out Verizon in at least one metric: helping the NSA spy In newly disclosed files from the National Security Agency , details of a “highly collaborative” partnership with AT&T have been released. The wireless carrier and Internet provider has given the agency access to billions of emails. Church open-door policy questioned After the Charleston, S.C., church shooting , some churches with predominantly black members are contemplating the balance between security, faith and their place in the community as a welcoming refuge. Civil rights activist dies Julian Bond , a former NAACP chairman and co-founder of the Southern Poverty Law Center, died Saturday at the age of 75. IN OTHER NEWS Sesame Street on HBO Sesame Street has more nudity than any of HBO’s other shows and one of its main characters lives in a trash can. It’s just as intense as Game of Thrones, right? The daily report was compiled by Halle Stockton, a PublicSource reporter. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at hstockton@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton