Posted in Daily report , posts May 23, 2015 by PublicSource contributor May 23, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA State College: Penn State president on the Greek life task force University President Eric Barron proposed an early warning system that would monitor several key metrics of fraternities and sororities, including grade-point average, dropout rate and their number of citations. The system is being discussed by a task force assembled after allegations that Kappa Delta Rho shared nude photos of drunken partygoers on social media. Pittsburgh: Wigle Whiskey bourbon For the first time in decades, a Pennsylvania-owned distillery will manufacture bourbon. Wigle Whiskey in the Strip District will start selling homemade bourbon this week. Harrisburg: Medical malpractice suit The family of a 2-year-old , who died after doctors did not discover her stomach had ruptured, was awarded $6 million in damages. Philadelphia: Temple University chair accused of selling secrets to China Xiaoxing Xi , the suspended chairman of the Temple Physics Department, is accused of sharing sensitive information about U.S. defense technology with the Chinese government. Allegheny County: Wage and housing price disparity A modest two-bedroom apartment in the county requires a wage of more than $15 an hour. Unless the gap closes, some long-term residents with low-wage service industry jobs are likely to get pushed out of the area. Statewide: Biggest job jump since 1996 A survey released Friday by the state Department of Labor and Industry shows the number of employed spiked by about 27,000 in April, with 10,000 workers getting jobs in the construction field alone. NATIONAL Chief suspect in the murders of affluent Washington family arrested A weeklong manhunt ended Thursday with the arrest of Daron Dylon Wint and four other suspects. Wint was charged with the first-degree murders of the Savopoulos family and their housekeeper. President Obama pushes environmentalism The Obama administration plans to introduce a bill that allows the federal government to limit pollution in bodies of water. The Clinton Foundation received up to $26 million in undisclosed payments The charity categorized speeches by the Clinton clan as revenue rather than donations , so the contributors of an amount between $12 and $26 million are not publicly listed, which may conflict with an ethics agreement. IN OTHER NEWS Sad grades on the Nation’s Report Card According to the National Center for Education Statistics , a standardized test indicates that 33 percent of U.S. eighth graders think Canada is a dictatorship. Meet the toucan getting a 3-D printed beak Grecia is a Costa Rican toucan whose beak was hacked off, but thanks to a fundraising campaign and the help of some veterinarians, he’s going to receive a prosthetic replacement. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.