Posted in Daily report , posts July 30, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 29, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Task force on affordable housing to meet The task force, which was formed nearly six months ago, is scheduled to convene for the first time today. The group’s goal is to develop a “suite of affordable housing policies” to cover people living in neighborhoods undergoing gentrification. Pittsburgh: “Women Betrayed” rally at Planned Parenthood Protesters rallied at the downtown establishment this week in response to videos released showing Planned Parenthood staffers discussing illegal activities. The organization said the footage was heavily edited and unlawfully obtained. Pittsburgh: 5 charged in T station beating Kevin Lockett, who was attacked by five Baldwin men on May 30, faced the suspects in court on Tuesday. A surveillance video showing the incident was played at the hearing. Statewide: Child abuse report shows risk in Pennsylvania The state report on child abuse shows a more than 30 percent spike in protective service referrals between 2010 and 2014. During this timespan, the Center for Children’s Justice found that more than 400 children in Pennsylvania died or nearly died because of abuse or neglect. Harrisburg: Governor’s proposed budget threatens hospital funding The plan would increase taxes on hospitals as well as reduce funding for maternity-related services and burn centers. Wolf spokesman Jeffrey Sheridan said the cuts are not unprecedented. Statewide: EPA to ease limits on cross-state air pollution After court order, the EPA is altering its policy on air pollution from smokestack emissions. Pennsylvania will get new limits on either sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides. A dozen other states will see changes, too. Indiana County: Cadmium exposure One person was hospitalized and 16 others were treated and released for cadmium exposure. The toxic chemical was found at a metals and alloy plant. About 300,000 workers are exposed to it annually throughout the United States. NATIONAL Cecil the lion case goes to court Two Zimbabweans allegedly involved with killing the beloved lion went to court Wednesday. They were both freed on bail. Suspect Walter Palmer, an American dentist who faces poaching charges, said he regrets the killing. Teen charged as adult in death of 8-year-old Prosecutors charged a 15-year-old boy with the murder and kidnapping of Madyson Middleton. She was last seen at the California complex where she lived on Sunday, and her body was found Monday night in Santa Cruz. Brady responds to NFL suspension Tom Brady said he “ did nothing wrong ” in response to his newly-instituted four-game suspension. Brady also addressed accusations that he destroyed his cell phone in order to hide evidence from the NFL. IN OTHER NEWS Happy birthday to everyone! New developments in the lawsuit by filmmakers who are fighting to use the song “Happy Birthday to You” without copyright infringement. Today, Warner/Chappell has a copyright on the song. However, the formalities surrounding the copyright are foggy . The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.