Posted in posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Philadelphia health officials to publicize restaurant inspections immediately by PublicSource contributor November 4, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Philadelphia’s health department is serving up a dish of transparency. The Philadelphia Inquirer reports that the health department will soon publicize health inspection results 24 to 72 hours after inspections are conducted. For decades, the department followed a policy that kept the inspection reports secret for 30 days. In the article, Philadelphia Public Health Department Spokesman Jeff Moran said the 30-day waiting period is unnecessary. “We have determined that the non-disclosure period is not required by the code, nor is it consistent with the Nutter Administration’s open-data policy.” The health department originally intended the withholding period to let restaurant owners address any code violations before the results went live. The timeframe also allowed restaurant owners to privately appeal failing inspection reports. However, the Inquirer found few appeals were made. The city’s health department inspects 12,000 eateries annually, 5,000 of which are sit-down restaurants. In the article, a former food safety official said Philadelphia should next consider a restaurant  grading system — either an A-B-C or green, yellow, red card system — that will be open to the public. Last month, PublicSource reported on the restaurant inspection system in Allegheny County. Its system filters restaurants into a green, yellow and red scale, which essentially serves as a pass or fail for restaurants. An A-B-C grading system has been considered in Allegheny County, but rejected multiple times. A PublicSource analysis showed that over 10 months of restaurant inspections, about 75 percent would get an A grade. The rest would have been designated as Bs and Cs. “A ‘C’ grade could include multiple high-risk violations, such as cutting lettuce on the same surface as raw meat, in addition to several medium- and low-risk violations. … “The analysis showed there were 57 inspections in that 10-month period that would’ve fallen below a ‘C’ and warranted an alert or closure by the health department. The health department actually issued just 11 consumer alerts and closed 11 restaurants.” Reach PublicSource intern Elaina Zachos at ezachos@publicsource.org. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Open-Records Law