Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts Nurse practitioners may soon be able to practice without physician oversight in Pennsylvania by PublicSource contributor May 19, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A state Senate committee has approved a bill that would allow certified nurse practitioners to see patients and make healthcare decisions without permission and collaboration from a physician. The Pennsylvania Senate Consumer Protection & Professional Licensure Committee approved Senate Bill 717 on Wednesday. For the nurse practitioner bill to become law, the bill would need to pass a full Senate vote and the House would need to approve the currently stalled sister bill, HB 765 ; only then would it be sent to Gov. Tom Wolf for his signature. While the Pennsylvania Coalition of Nurse Practitioners and the Hospital and Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania [HAP] have issued support for the bill, the Pennsylvania Medical Society [PAMED] has expressed distaste for the committee’s decision. In a recent statement, PAMED President Dr. Scott Shapiro said he feels the nurse practitioner bill “devalues” healthcare teams: By eliminating the collaborative ties that exist between nurse practitioners and physicians, SB 717 removes an important safeguard in patient care and fragments the health care team. … Let’s not destroy team-based medical care and instead promote existing law that allows both physicians and nurse practitioners to exercise the full range of medical knowledge available at the moment it is needed. Along with HB 765, SB 717 seeks to amend the act of May 22, 1951, ( P.L.317, No.69 ), as reported by PublicSource earlier this month: House Bill 765 and Senate Bill 717 would allow a certified nurse practitioner to order home health and hospice care, make physical therapy and dietician referrals, and “perform and sign initial assessment of methadone treatment evaluations,” among other abilities without mandatory collaboration with a physician. … A recent study from the University of Texas found that patients who have nurse practitioners as their primary care provider require fewer hospital admissions. A similar study conducted by the University of Montana found that having nurse practitioners work with patients individually can reduce healthcare costs by as much as 29 percent. The Senate Consumer Protection & Professional Licensure Committee approved SB 717 by a majority roll call vote of 12-1 . The lone dissenter was Sen. John Gordner , a member of the Senate Republican leadership team who represents Columbia, Montour, Snyder, Northumberland and parts of Luzerne counties. If signed into law, Pennsylvania would join 21 other states and Washington, D.C., that allow certified nurse practitioners to practice without physician oversight. Reach Courtney Linder at clinder@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @CNL_13 . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI