Posted in Pennsylvania ‘The need is great’ for funding public defenders, Shapiro says after proposing $10M increase This year’s state budget includes the first public defense funding in Pennsylvania history. But Gov. Josh Shapiro says that $7.5 million commitment doesn’t match the needs of cash-strapped county systems. by Peter Hall, Pennsylvania Capital-Star February 14, 2024 February 18, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The "bridge of sighs" between the Allegheny County Courthouse and the former jail (which now houses Family Court) over Ross Street in downtown Pittsburgh. (Photo by Kat Procyk/PublicSource) A year after taking the first steps to end Pennsylvania’s “shameful distinction” as one of only two states that did not pay for public defenders, Gov. Josh Shapiro and state lawmakers said Monday they would negotiate to make more money available for indigent defense. In a news conference that followed the first meeting of the Pennsylvania Commission on Crime and Delinquency’s Indigent Defense Advisory Committee, lawmakers and Shapiro spoke about the importance of investing in public defenders’ offices. “When we talk about public safety, it’s not only investing in law enforcement,” said state House Speaker Joanna McClinton, D-Philadelphia, who is a former public defender. “It is also inappropriately funding public defense, because what we can never afford is for even one wrongfully convicted person to spend a second of their lives behind bars.” As part of his second budget proposal, Shapiro has called to increase funding for public defenders’ offices across the state by $10 million. That would be on top of $7.5 million in the current state budget. He credited McClinton with beginning the process several years earlier, by introducing legislation “two or three terms ago.” The Indigent Defense Advisory Committee is tasked with developing statewide standards and a statewide funding system for public defenders, who are required to represent those charged with crimes who cannot afford to hire a private criminal defense attorney. Until the 2023-24 budget was finalized last year, Pennsylvania provided no financial support to county public defenders whose funding was at the discretion of county officials. As a result, many public defenders’ offices are woefully underfunded. In addition to laying groundwork for a future system of grants to pay for public defenders, the Indigent Defense Advisory Committee is also responsible for: Proposing minimum standard for indigent defense services for the state Supreme Court Developing standards for counties and partnerships with other agencies to collect data on indigent defense Establishing a training library for public defenders Adopting standards for case management systems Reporting on trends and the effectiveness of services to the General Assembly. Sara Jacobson, chair of the committee, and director of the Public Defender Association of Pennsylvania, said the $7.5 million in the current budget is a good down payment and provides a historic opportunity to make Pennsylvania’s justice system more fair. Jacobson described meeting with a new chief defender in a county in Western Pennsylvania — the county’s third chief defender in 12 months. The county’s previous chief defender had resigned because he didn’t think he could ethically fulfill his duties, Jacobson said, due to the size of the workload, which amounted to hundreds of cases. The new chief defender didn’t know how many cases she had exactly, because a flood had damaged paper records and the office didn’t have digitized records. “That’s what inadequate funding looks like on the ground,” Jacobson said. “Pennsylvanians deserve better, and the Constitution requires more. That better, that more? Starts today with the Indigent Defense Advisory Committee.” “The need is great,” for public defenders, Shapiro said — 54% of criminal defendants are represented by public defenders across the Commonwealth, he noted — and even before the committee has performed its full analysis, it was clear that the cost would be more than the $17.5 million he proposed in the next budget. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “We shouldn’t let the perfect be the enemy of the possible. We got done a big thing last year in coming together to get this started. Now this commission can identify the need across the state,” Shapiro said, adding that he would return to lawmakers for the money needed to champion indigent defense. Kim Lyons contributed. This story was first published by Pennsylvania Capital-Star. Read more of their coverage here . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , attorneys , budget , funding , indigent defense , Josh Shapiro , leadstorynoshow , public defenders