Posted in COVID-19 Second person who died of coronavirus in Allegheny County did not know they had it by Oliver Morrison March 24, 2020 March 24, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A second person has died of coronavirus in Allegheny County. The person was not aware they had the virus, according to a Tuesday morning press release from the county. The woman in her late 70s had not traveled recently, according to the release. She had other medical conditions that may have delayed her recognizing that she had COVID-19. The medics who responded to her passing were wearing personal protective equipment, according to the release. After test results came back positive for COVID-19, the Allegheny County Health Department began to determine who the woman had been in touch with. The family has been placed in self-isolation. The county said it wouldn’t typically provide so many details about the case but is doing so because it was investigated by the county medical examiner’s office. There are now 58 total cases in Allegheny County, including six who are hospitalized, according to a Tuesday release by the county. The latest on coronavirus in the Pittsburgh region The first death in Allegheny County was announced on Saturday. Oliver Morrison is PublicSource’s environment and health reporter. He can be reached at oliver@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ORMorrison. PublicSource has a special page dedicated to our reporting on COVID-19 for the Pittsburgh region. See it here and sign up for our newsletter to stay informed. We hope you are following the news and, if your situation allows, social distancing guidelines .  Have a tip or an idea? Please email mila@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram Oliver Morrison oliver@publicsource.org x Oliver reports on K-12 education for PublicSource. Before becoming a journalist, Oliver taught English and drama in the Arkansas Delta for seven years. He has previously written education features in New... More by Oliver Morrison