Posted in VIDEO Watch: In a summer of protest, members of the skateboard community join the push for racial justice by Nick Childers October 14, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X ﻿ ﻿ ﻿ ﻿ ﻿ ﻿ In Pittsburgh, a diverse community of skaters joined the movement against police violence following the May 25 killing of George Floyd. For Black skaters like Emmanuel Davis, skating has long been a source of expression and lately has served as an outlet for activism. During protests this summer, local skaters called for justice for Antwon Rose II, a fellow skater who was killed by a police officer in East Pittsburgh. Former officer Michael Rosfeld was charged with murder but acquitted last year, and the tragedy of Rose’s death immediately resonated with Davis. “That’s kind of why I’ve gotten into activism a little bit more, just trying to expose everything that’s going on,” he said. Nick Childers is a Pittsburgh-based visual journalist and filmmaker. He can be reached at nick@nickchilders.com . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram