Posted in DATA , Local Government , Price of the Prize Price of the Prize by Andrew McGill , Laura Malt Schneiderman and Alexandra Kanik October 13, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Pennsylvania Department of State releases text files of every campaign contribution to every state race on its website. We downloaded those files and selected the contributions to the Corbett and Wolf campaigns. We then standardized the names and addresses. For instance, if John Smith and John A. Smith each sent in a contribution from the same address, we figured out if they were the same person. Then we combined the amounts. We also corrected for any misspellings. We standardized the zip codes. Some people wrote five-digit zip code and others wrote full nine-digit zips. We wanted each person to be represented by a five-digit zip code so we could easily group them. The original data did not contain a designation for counties. Originally, we used Census lookup tables and the Census geocoder to generate counties, but that resulted in an error rate of approximately 4.5 percent. During the campaign, we used the Google Maps geocoder through the open-source mapping program QGIS. For the app’s final update, we used a combination of geocoding resources. First, we used a Bing/MapQuest geocoder developed by Peter Aldhous, BuzzFeed science and health reporter and professor at University of California. Any addresses that were not found using that method were feed through the Google geocoder. We believe using multiple geocoders has given us the most accurate results. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Campaign finance , Data