Posted in HEALTH Roe v. Wade is gone. Share your abortion story. What’s your reaction to the Supreme Court’s decision? Do you have a pregnancy or abortion-related story? We want to hear it. by TyLisa C. Johnson July 6, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Protesters gather in front of the City-County Building in Downtown Pittsburgh hours after the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the Roe v. Wade decision that established the right to abortion nationally. (Photo by Quinn 
Glabicki/PublicSource) Roe v. Wade was toppled on June 24 by the Supreme Court of the United States. Activists immediately took to the Pittsburgh streets . Students mobilized , searching for ways to support their peers and speaking out about how the decision is likely to  disproportionately impact marginalized people.  Professors spoke out about concern for the future of other currently protected rights . Abortions remain legal in Pennsylvania as of July 2022. Gov. Tom Wolf, a clear supporter of abortion rights, will leave office in early 2023. Should Pennsylvania elect a Republican governor in 2022, it’s possible the commonwealth would see more restrictive laws enacted . Many are wondering what’s next and what this decision will mean for millions of Americans. What’s your reaction to the Supreme Court’s decision? Do you have a pregnancy or abortion-related story to share? We want to hear your story. We want to hear from you about abortion rights and restrictions in PA. Roe v. Wade was overturned on June 24. What do you think the impact will be on your community? We encourage you to be specific, either to your personal situation or highlighting services that may see a change in demand. What questions do you have about Roe v. Wade or abortion access that you feel haven’t been answered? What’s missing from the conversation on the local level? Do you have a personal experience related to pregnancy or abortion that you want to share in the context of the Roe v. Wade conversation? Name (Required) Email (We won’t publish or share this information. A reporter may use it to follow up with you.) (Required) Location Age Sign up for PublicSource's free newsletter Δ Read more Roe v. Wade coverage: Supreme Court decision on Roe puts PA advocates on defense, brings protest, sharp responses from officials This Pittsburgh psychiatrist risked his reputation to help hundreds receive safe abortions in the ’60s. Now, he doesn’t feel safe talking about it. How student leaders of Pittsburgh campus groups are responding, mobilizing after Roe reversal Professors express concern for marginalized communities, protected rights in wake of Roe reversal Read more: Tell us: We want to hear from you about abortion rights and restrictions. TyLisa C. Johnson is the audience engagement editor for PublicSource. She can be reached at tylisa@publicsource.org or on Twitter at @tylisawrites . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: abortion , Allegheny County , health , leadstorynoshow , Overlooked communities , roe v wade , scotus , supreme court , womens health TyLisa C. Johnson tylisa@publicsource.org x TyLisa C. Johnson is the Audience Engagement Editor at PublicSource. She’s passionate about telling compelling human stories that intersect with complex issues affecting marginalized groups. Before joining... More by TyLisa C. Johnson