Posted in Inside our Newsroom Public Records 101 A selection of sites you can use, for free, to find credible public information. by Rich Lord March 15, 2022 December 30, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PA Corporations Bureau lookup Guidestar PA Unified Judicial System Allegheny County Department of Court Records Allegheny County Real Estate website PA License Verification System Pittsburgh City Council Legistar Allegheny County Council Legistar Allegheny County Executive Actions Allegheny County contracts portal Allegheny Analytics Allegheny County health indicators Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Pennsylvania General Assembly legislation lookup Federal Election Commission lookup Pennsylvania Campaign Finance lookup Allegheny County Elections Division campaign finance lookup OpenbookPittsburgh Pittsburgh building permits map Allegheny County Elections Results State Ethics Commission lookup Pa. school enrollment data Enrollment projections PSSA test scores Pennsylvania  Right-to-Know Act PA Office of Open Records request form templates Board Explorer Allegheny County Department of  Human Services advisory boards Census Reporter Carnegie Library Research Resources Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord