In-Depth Reporting 360 Video: Priya is a teen roboticist interested in how robots can revolutionize medicine By Ryan Loew June 20, 2017 Priya Ray is busy. Her peers are tossing a ball behind her, but she’s not looking back. She spread out several tools on her workspace, and the 16-year-old is fixing a wire connection on a robot. Ray is a member of the Girls of Steel robotics team. Priya and fellow members of this all-girl team work together inside Carnegie Mellon University’s Field Robotics Center to build robots that perform tasks, like picking items up or tossing them. The girls take their creations and compete with robotics teams from around the world. Priya recently served as the team’s safety captain and was a member of its electronics sub-team. Priya, who identifies as black and Indian, got involved with the Girls of Steel in 2014 while in eighth grade. She is a rising high school junior. This summer, she is participating in a cancer research internship with the University of Pittsburgh. *Desktop: Use your cursor and the toggle on the right of the screen to move around this 360 video. *Mobile: Move your phone around and enjoy! Reach Ryan Loew at ryan@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @RyanLoew . Their Stories Tyneisha continues quest to prove herself as a parent with a disability, but she could still lose her son ‘Young Black Pittsburgh’ ambassadors connect with the girls who shared their stories through letters The vicious cycle inside Allegheny County juvenile court for black girls and their mothers. I saw it up close. Tiara Tabb: In this black-or-white world, I want to find the gray area Jayla Wright: Relationships can tear you down and lift you up. Tyneisha thinks her disability shouldn’t disqualify her from motherhood Being 16: Janae turns to poetry to make art out of struggle Shaunese Johnson: Schools teach the same black history over and over. Students deserve better. Pittsburgh has a severe shortage of black teachers and that’s hurting black students. Tamia Law: Living in Clairton: ‘Nobody really cares unless it is football’ Getting in the game: Physical activity is a win-win for black girls Pittsburgh’s black girls face lots of inequity barriers. Advocates want tangible change. Corrine Jasmin: They say I’m pretty — for a black girl. Dezmaire gave birth in eighth grade. As a teen mom in Pittsburgh, she’s fighting to beat the odds and graduate. Maia Ervin: I am black, I am a student, and I’m tired of racism on my campus Zoe Vongtau: ‘I hid my accent and culture. I was just always the new black girl.’ She lost her mom and her home. How Monet is finding a promising future in Pittsburgh. 11-year-old Keliyah wants to be a lawyer, sings a special song If everyone got screened, gifted education in Pittsburgh could be more equitable. School officials aren’t sold. When some students are labeled as gifted, I see the harm done to those left behind Who gets to be considered ‘gifted’ in Pittsburgh schools?  Too few black girls. Donise Griffin: Why don’t more students at Pittsburgh’s Gifted Center look like me? Videos: Six women speak about the outlook for black girls in Pittsburgh Do black girls pay a higher price when comprehensive sex education isn’t taught? Amariah Woodson: Racism can be difficult to prove, but I think it happened to me Sienna Rodriguez-Truley: The parts of me that can’t be mixed and matched There are ways to end the school-to-prison pipeline Relive the Gwen’s Girls Equity Summit through what was discussed on social media Gwen’s Girls summit highlights how suspensions derail black girls’ education A story of two girls: Why being black means more scrutiny and punishment in Pittsburgh schools How institutions and society fail Pittsburgh’s black girls