Posted in Uncategorized May ‘By the Book’: PGH K-12 Bulletins by TyLisa C. Johnson May 25, 2021 June 17, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Welcome to “By The Book: PGH K-12 Bulletins,” which provides updates on emerging and ever changing news in the Pittsburgh K-12 education landscape. With more than 40 school districts across Allegheny County, the Bulletins will update you on the region’s latest education news, including close coverage of the Pittsburgh Public Schools, other Allegheny County school districts, the Pennsylvania Department of Education and other important agencies, which serve thousands of Pittsburgh families. Please check back frequently and email tylisa@publicsource.org with questions, tips or Bulletin ideas. Follow along on Twitter with the hashtag #PGHed for news updates on Pittsburgh education. 5/25/21: Allegheny County names first director of Department of Children Initiatives A new Allegheny County director is tasked with better preparing children for success, especially in communities in which preschool and after-school programs have long fallen short. Rebecca Mercatoris will be the first director of the fledgling Department of Children Initiatives, and will promptly start bringing county, state, federal and private dollars to early childhood education and out-of-school-time programs. “All of Allegheny County’s children and families deserve comprehensive, equitable and high-quality early learning and out-of-school-time services if we are to continue to build our county’s reputation as a great place to live, work and raise children,” Mercatoris said at a press conference in the County Courthouse. Read more at Develop PGH Bulletins . 5/14/21: All students, five days a week this fall, district leaders say All Pittsburgh Public Schools [PPS] students will have the option to return to buildings five days a week for classes this fall, District Superintendent Anthony Hamlet said in a briefing on Friday afternoon. “Even as recommendations for masking and social distancing decrease we will not be making changes to our classrooms or COVID-19 protocols for the end of this current school year,” Hamlet said. “This is our goal but we will always be ready to pivot for the health and safety of our students and staff should the CDC, state guidelines require it.” The district is collaborating with UPMC and Giant Eagle to host additional student vaccination clinics ahead of the fall. TyLisa C. Johnson covers education for PublicSource. She can be reached at tylisa@publicsource.org . May recap: 5/25/21: Allegheny County names first director of Department of Children Initiatives 5/14/21: All students, five days a week this fall, district leaders say March recap: 3/24/21: By May 3 , all PPS students will return, district leaders say 3/19/21: No changes for PPS based on CDC guidance and more news on students’ return to schools January recap: 1/20/21: Another in-person instruction delay on the table for PPS 1/5/21: 5 takeaways from PPS’ first address of 2021 December recap: 12/16/20: Pittsburgh Public passes 2021 budget without a tax increase. Here are 3 key takeaways. 12/15/20: For the 2021 Pittsburgh Public budget, a property tax hike is on the table 12/11/20: Advocates call out a lack of state special ed funding in PA as costs skyrocket 12/10/20: Q&A: A chance to change – One PA advocate on what PPS should fund instead of school police in 2021 budget TyLisa C. Johnson covers education for PublicSource. She can be reached at tylisa@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI TyLisa C. Johnson tylisa@publicsource.org x TyLisa C. Johnson is the Audience Engagement Editor at PublicSource. She’s passionate about telling compelling human stories that intersect with complex issues affecting marginalized groups. Before joining... More by TyLisa C. Johnson