Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Democrats hope the pope’s visit will nix climate change denial in Congress by Natasha Khan September 23, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Could Pope Francis’ visit to America finally help quash climate change doubters in Congress? Democrats sure hope so. According to The Guardian , Democratic members of Congress and environmental groups hope the pope will keep the focus of his six-day visit on his “core themes” of climate change, poverty and global economic order. The pope is scheduled to address Congress on Thursday morning. He’ll be the first pope ever to do so. Sheldon Whitehouse, the Democratic senator from Rhode Island, said he believed the call to action from a popular pope made it increasingly difficult for Republicans to continue to dismiss the science on climate change. “I think this whole edifice of climate denial is crumbling,” Whitehouse told the Guardian. But some Republicans worried that the pope’s visit would become an opportunity to call them out on their climate change stances. On the eve of the pope’s visit, Paul Gosar, a Catholic Republican from Arizona, said he would boycott Francis for promoting what he called “questionable science” . Some Democrats hope the pope’s visit will help sway some moderate Republicans to back bills on energy and climate change. “The pope will be helpful in bringing some of the moderates to us,” Ruben Gallegos, a Democratic house member from Arizona, [said in] a conference call. But Gallegos also said the visit probably wouldn’t stop Republican attacks on the Obama Administration’s Clean Power Plan. “Unfortunately the attack on the president’s efforts to mitigate carbon emissions from coal power plants will continue from that wing of the Republican party.” In June, Pope Francis released a 180-page encyclical seen as an intervention in the climate debate, where he called on the world’s wealthiest nations to pay their “social debt” to the poor and take real steps to address a warming planet. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “The Earth, our home, is beginning to look like an immense pile of filth,” the pope wrote in the encyclical. The Guardian article points out that even before the pope released his encyclical, Republicans in Congress had been “slowly edging away from outright climate denial.” Fifteen Senate Republicans voted at the beginning of the year that humans have contributed to climate change. And last week, on the cusp of the pope’s visit, nearly a dozen Republicans broke party ranks when they signed a resolution calling for actions to address climate change. In his encyclical, the pope called for a major divestment from fossil fuels. Yet, as Reuters found , Catholic officials in U.S. oil states are leasing out church land to oil and gas drilling. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan