Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY 2014 was a busy year for researchers interested in fracking by Natasha Khan December 24, 2014 November 19, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Since the fracking boom began, the debate over the health and environmental implications of shale drilling has been hindered by a lack of scientific research. But more research is being done all the time. And with New York’s recent announcement that it banned fracking based on potential environmental and health impacts, there is sure to be increased pressure on researchers to keep digging. Here are several important studies published in 2014. This is by no means a comprehensive list. Other studies have looked at different impacts of the industry, including the potential climate impacts from methane emissions (see this PublicSource post on two recent studies.) Fracking brought increased road deaths, housing costs, crime and STDs to PA drilling towns Date published: December 2014 Study: “The Shale Tipping Point: The Relationship of Drilling to Crime, Traffic Fatalities, STDs, and Rents in Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Ohio” Researchers: Multi-State Research Collaborative Synopsis: This report looked at the relationship between drilling activity in Pennsylvania, Ohio and West Virginia and the human and social impacts. The Multi-State Research Collaborative is a group of independent, nonpartisan research and policy organizations from Pennsylvania, New York, Ohio, Virginia and West Virginia, according to its website . (The collaborative and PublicSource both receive funds from The Heinz Endowments.) The study looked at six Pennsylvania counties with 400 or more wells: Bradford, Tioga, Susquehanna, Greene, Washington and Lycoming. Here are the report’s main findings: Violent crime increased 17.7 percent and property crime 10 percent in the six high-drilling Pennsylvania counties, when compared to areas with little or no drilling. Between 2005 and 2012, drug abuse rates rose 48 percent and DUI offenses were up 65 percent. Since 2005, rates of chlamydia infection across all the drilling counties increased 24 percent compared to non-drilling counties. Truck-involved traffic fatalities increased in high drilling counties by 27.8 percent. The social impacts observed in Pennsylvania were not seen in West Virginia, “perhaps because drilling development there has been slower and less concentrated, and were only beginning to appear in Ohio in 2012, the last year of the study, when drilling there had just begun to accelerate,” the study states. “Our report aims to give communities where drilling has not occurred … an idea of what the potential impacts will be,” said Stephen Herzenberg, executive director of the Keystone Research Center , a labor-backed policy center, told The Patriot News. Pollution from shale gas operations could cause reproductive and development issues in humans Date published: Nov. 5, 2014 Study: “Developmental and reproductive effects of chemicals associated with unconventional oil and natural gas operations” Researchers: Center for Environmental Health, Institute for Health and the Environment, University of Missouri – Biological Sciences, University of Missouri – Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women’s Health Missouri Synopsis: A lengthy review of more than 150 peer-reviewed studies looking at the effects of chemicals used in unconventional shale gas operations determined there are human health concerns, including around human reproduction and development. The researchers concluded that exposure to air and water pollution from shale gas activities may be linked to infertility, impaired fetal growth, birth defects, reduced semen quality and miscarriages. High levels of cancerous air toxins near oil and gas sites in Pennsylvania, Arkansas and Wyoming Date published : Oct. 30, 2014 Researchers : Center for Health, Science, and Public Policy — Brooklyn Law School, Global Community Monitor, Environmental Law Alliance Worldwide, Center for Environmental Health, Powder River Basin Resource Council, Institute for Health and the Environment — University at Albany Study: “Air concentrations of volatile compounds near oil and gas production: A community-based exploratory study” Synopsis: Air samples collected near oil and gas operations by trained volunteers (some were members of environmental groups) in Pennsylvania, Arkansas and Wyoming showed that levels of eight volatile chemicals exceeded federal guidelines. The study showed benzene , formaldehyde , and hydrogen sulfide were the most common compounds to exceed federal guidelines. Benzene and formaldehyde are classified as cancer causing compounds by federal agencies and, as EnergyWire points out, hydrogen sulfide, or “sour gas,” is known to poison and kill oil-field workers. The lead researcher, David Carpenter, a physician and director of the Institute for Health and the Environment at New York State University at Albany, told the StateImpact Pennsylvania : “One thing about cancer is that it doesn’t happen tomorrow after exposure,” said Carpenter. “Cancer usually takes at least five, but more often 10, 20 or even 30 years to develop. So our concern is that these carcinogens that were monitored near homes, near schools, near farms with animals, the people that are exposed are going to be at risk of developing cancer. But it will only appear in the future.” Backlash: The study got some heat from writers at the gas-industry public relations website Energy In Depth , who said the researchers used flawed methods and questioned the political beliefs of volunteers. Shoddy well casings caused water contamination in Pennsylvania and Texas, not fracking Date published: Sept. 15, 2014 Study: “Noble Gases Identify the Mechanisms of Fugitive Gas Contamination in Drinking-Water Wells Overlying the Marcellus and Barnett Shales” Researchers: Duke, Ohio State, Stanford and Dartmouth universities and the University of Rochester Synopsis: Researchers at five universities analyzed the gas content of 130 drinking water wells in Pennsylvania and Texas and found that faulty gas well integrity, not pushing millions of gallons of water deep underground during the fracking process, was the primary cause of drinking water contamination from shale gas extraction. “These results appear to rule out the possibility that methane has migrated up into drinking water aquifers because of horizontal drilling or hydraulic fracturing, as some people feared,” Avner Vengosh, professor of geochemistry and water quality at Duke, said in a press release . Researchers found eight clusters of wells, seven in Pennsylvania and one in Texas, with methane contamination from various well-integrity problems, including poor casing and cementing. “The good news is that most of the issues we have identified can potentially be avoided by future improvements in well integrity,” Thomas H. Darrah, assistant professor of earth science at Ohio State, who led the study, said in the press release. A U.S. Department of Energy report released around the same time also found that gas from fracking didn’t migrate to drinking water aquifers at a shale extraction site in Greene County, Pa. People living closer to gas wells more likely to report health issues Date published: Sept. 10, 2014 Study: “Proximity to Natural gas wells and reported health status: results of a household survey in Washington County, Pa.” Researchers: Yale University School of Medicine, University of Washington, Yale School of Public Health, Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Sciences, Colorado State University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences Synopsis: This study found that people living within one kilometer of a gas well reported more health symptoms than those living two kilometers away. Upper respiratory symptoms and skin conditions were most commonly reported. The researchers recommended further study and suggested looking at what specific air and water exposures might be the causes. Treated frack wastewater in rivers presents threats to drinking water Date published: Sept. 9, 2014 Study: “ Enhanced Formation of Disinfection Byproducts in Shale Gas Wastewater-Impacted Drinking Water Supplies ” Researchers: Duke and Stanford universities Synopsis: This research shows that treated wastewater from the hydraulic fracturing process, when released into rivers, can produce dangerous cancer-causing chemicals if the water is processed at a drinking-water treatment plant. Water that comes up from a well after it’s been fracked, called brine, contains salts called bromides, as well as chemicals chlorides and iodides. If wastewater is processed conventionally at a treatment plant, which doesn’t remove these elements, and then released into a waterway, that water could enter a drinking water treatment plant and cause trihalomethanes. These are carcinogens linked to bladder, kidney and liver cancer. The EPA requires limits on trihalomethanes in drinking water. The study found that if amounts as low as .01 percent per volume of fracking water is combined with chlorine, used by drinking water facilities as a disinfectant, it can create carcinogens. In 2011, the state Department of Environmental Protection asked the natural gas industry to voluntarily stop taking frack wastewater to water treatment plants, which the industry said it has abided by. That fact prompted an industry public relations group to slam the study. Shale gas workers could breathe in high levels of dangerous carcinogen Date published: Aug. 1, 2014 Study: “ Evaluation of Some Potential Chemical Exposure Risks during Flowback Operations in Unconventional Oil and Gas Extraction: Preliminary Results ” Researchers: National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health Synopsis: This study shows that shale oil and gas workers could be exposed to high levels of benzene, which is a known carcinogen. Exposure to benzene has been shown to cause blood cancers, including leukemia. It is a hydrocarbon that is found in fracking flowback water. Workers can breathe it in when working around wastewater , including measuring fluid levels in tanks where the water is stored. The study was relatively small in size, testing workers at six sites in two states, Colorado and Wyoming. The study used air sampling and samples of workers urine to draw its conclusions. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Employment , Energy , Marcellus Shale Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan