Jobs at Pittsburgh’s Public Source Editorial intern Photojournalism intern Public Source editorial internship Public Source is a nonprofit news outlet in Pittsburgh. We write stories with powerful narratives and characters, often beautifully illustrated and supported by data visualization, to explain complex issues in the areas of local government, economic development, education, health, the environment and climate, and gender and identity. Check us out at PublicSource.org . Interns play important roles in Public Source’s journalism: checking the facts on stories pre-publication, conducting research for ongoing projects and typically writing stories, individually and in teams with our professional reporters. Interns are mentored by members of our reporting team and have regular and meaningful interaction with editors and the entire staff. Here’s what we’re looking for in an editorial intern: We want someone who goes through life with an eye for untold stories and can figure out how to tell those stories through interviews and research as well as technically sound and creative writing. We expect interns to pitch ideas for enterprise stories, work independently and in teams, and communicate with editors about progress toward publication. Interns should be able to share stories on social media and have ideas for how all of our stories could get more exposure. (Note: We will check your social media accounts for professionalism.) Interest in other forms of audience engagement is also welcomed. Accuracy will be king to the right intern, who will be trained in our fact-checking system and asked to conduct vigorous fact checks. This is a paid internship. To qualify for the stipend of $2,250, we ask interns to work 15 hours a week for 15 weeks (or another agreed upon schedule). Half of the intern stipend will be paid out eight weeks in and the remainder at the end of the internship. (If that timing of payment is problematic, please reach out to discuss.) If you have a professor who will give you credit, we’re also happy to fill out the forms. We also cooperate with college programs that provide financial support for internships. We operate as a hybrid newsroom, between our office in Pittsburgh’s Uptown neighborhood and virtual. We encourage candidates of underrepresented backgrounds to apply. Questions? Email Managing Editor Rich Lord at rich@publicsource.org . To apply, please fill out this form by the date indicated in the chart below. Semester desired Applications start Application deadline Spring Sept. 1 Nov. 1 Summer Nov. 1 Feb. 15 Fall May 1 July 1 Public Source photojournalism internship Public Source is a nonprofit news outlet in Pittsburgh. We write stories with powerful narratives and characters to explain complex issues in the areas of local government, economic development, education, health, the environment and climate, and gender and identity. All of our stories are enhanced by beautiful documentary-style photography or video. Check us out at PublicSource.org. If you’re interested in what we do, here’s what we’re looking for in an visuals intern: Someone with an eye for composing great photos and potentially photo essays that relay the essence of a person or a story. An interest or experience in videography. The ability to conceptualize how to capture the audience’s attention on social media with different ways to present the visuals, like Instagram stories, Facebook galleries and more. Strong time management and scheduling skills. Not every assignment will be during normal hours, so we need someone who is responsible and flexible. We like it when our interns are driven, take initiative and work collaboratively with the Public Source team to make our time together worthwhile for all involved. This is a paid internship. To qualify for the stipend of $2,250, we ask interns to work 15 hours a week for 15 weeks (or another agreed upon schedule). Half of the intern stipend will be paid out eight weeks in and the remainder at the end of the internship. (If timing of payment is prohibitive, please reach out to discuss.) If you have a professor who will give you credit, we’re also happy to fill out the forms. We operate as a hybrid newsroom, between our office in Pittsburgh’s Uptown neighborhood and virtual. We encourage candidates of underrepresented backgrounds to apply. Questions? Email Creative Director Natasha Vicens at natasha@publicsource.org . To apply, please fill out this form by the date indicated in the chart below. Semester desired Applications start Application deadline Spring Sept. 1 Nov. 1 Summer Nov. 1 Feb. 15 Fall May 1 July 1 About Public Source About Newsletters Contact us Send tips & ideas Advertise with us Donate Membership FAQs Republishing guidelines Our partners Board of Directors Jobs Working with us