Posted in Election 2024 Pa. House Republicans seek to move voter ID bill forward A Republican spokesperson said a discharge petition resolution was circulated Monday in the House. by John Cole March 27, 2024 April 4, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Privacy booths photographed at an election office at the South Park Ice Rink in October 2020. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) On Monday, Pennsylvania House Republican leadership announced plans to file a discharge resolution to get a constitutional amendment for voter ID to the House floor for a vote, and ultimately to voters in November’s general election. “Common sense tells us that more and more proposals, including the one introduced last week by House Democrats, are introduced to make our elections harder to administer and less secure and that simply requiring a state-provided identification at each election is the best way to enhance election security,” said House Minority Leader Bryan Cutler, R-Lancaster. Cutler referred to a proposal from Pennsylvania House Speaker Joanna McClinton, that would change Pennsylvania’s voting rules to allow same-day voting and early voting . House Bill 891 , sponsored by state Reps. Torren Ecker, R-Adams, and Thomas Kutz, R-Cumberland, would amend Pennsylvania’s Constitution to require valid voter identification in order to vote in every election. This bill has been in the House State Government Committee since April 2023. “Pennsylvania already has a voter ID law,” Ecker said Monday. “The first time you go to a precinct, the first time you go to vote, you need to provide voter ID. This legislation just enhances and strengthens what we already have.” In October, the state House declined to advance a package of election reforms which included a voter ID requirement and a proposal to move the state’s presidential primary date from April 23 to mid-March. That vote failed 177-26 . Election 2024 Push to cut 10s of thousands from Allegheny County voter rolls feeds fears A Republican faction is asking election officials to trim voters from the list. In an atmosphere of election suspicion, some fear the bid could feed an “echo chamber.” House Democrats pushed back, noting that every Republican voted against the October legislation. “The constitution grants rights. It doesn’t and shouldn’t take away rights,” Elizabeth Rementer, Press Secretary for House Majority Leader Matt Bradford, D-Montgomery, said in an email Monday. “Therefore, any attempt to disenfranchise voters through a constitutional amendment is a non-starter for House Democrats. In addition, House Republicans had the opportunity to pass a voter ID provision through legislation but instead voted against it last October. This is nothing more than a political stunt.” In order to use the discharge resolution for the bill to be brought up for a vote on the House floor, 50 members, 25 from each party , would need to sign it. Cutler said that 22 Democrats had previously voted in favor of voter ID and only “three more reasonable Democrats” would be needed to endorse the measure to bring it out of committee and on to the House floor for a vote. Election 2024 Who’s running in Allegheny County elections in 2024? Southwestern Pennsylvania could determine control of the White House, the Pennsylvania legislature and Congress. Here are the candidates running in the General Election. In theory, if the attempt to bring it to the floor for a full vote is successful and passed by the legislature by early July, the question could be presented to the voters in November’s general election. But it’s not clear whether House Republicans would be able to garner enough support for the discharge resolution. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting According to a co-sponsorship memo , the amendment includes language that “makes clear that both photo and non-photo options are acceptable forms of identification.” House Republicans said in a press release that the discharge petition resolution would be officially offered Monday in the House chamber. While a spokesperson for the House Republicans later said the discharge petition had been filed Monday, the House clerk did not immediately provide a copy to the Capital-Star when requested on Tuesday. This story was first published by Pennsylvania Capital-Star. Read more of their coverage here . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: democracy , election integrity , Elections , General Assembly , Harrisburg , news partners , Pennsylvania , Republicans , voter ID