Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan August 21, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been at least six train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. PA rail safety report released A report commissioned by Gov. Tom Wolf released this week put forth 27 recommendations to decrease the risks of crude oil trains traveling through the state, including reducing the speed in big cities to 35 mph, according to PublicSource . Could crude oil trains reroute around Pittsburgh? The two major railroads are looking at possibly bypassing Pittsburgh when mapping out future crude oil train routes, a state railroad expert said on a call with reporters this week, according to the Pittsburgh Business Times. Judge orders railroads to give up information on crude oil train routes in Maryland After the federal government ordered railroads to release information on crude oil routes in May 2014, many states decided to make the information public, including Pennsylvania, after news organizations pressed state officials. Maryland was the only state the railroads took to court to block a release and a judge ruled this week that the data should not be kept from the public, according to McClatchy Newspapers. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan