Who supports Pittsburgh’s Public Source? Public Source is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization. It is supported by individual contributions, organizational sponsors, advertisements and foundation grants. We thank all of our supporters for the resources that they provide, allowing Public Source to continue producing high-quality, local journalism. Individual donors, corporate partners and foundations play no role in guiding the execution of journalism or Public Source events. They support Public Source’s belief that quality reporting, as well as informed and engaged residents, are essential to building a better Pittsburgh and the region. Our organization will make public all individual donors who give a total of $1,000 or more, which exceeds the Institute for Nonprofit News (INN’s) recommended policy for donor disclosures. We will accept anonymous donations for general support only if it is clear that sufficient safeguards have been put into place that the expenditure of that donation is made independently by our organization and in compliance with INN’s Membership Standards. Foundation Supporters These philanthropic organizations currently provide operating or project-based support to Public Source: American Press Institute Eden Hall Foundation FISA Foundation Henry L.  Hillman Foundation Inasmuch Foundation Jewish Healthcare Foundation Lenfest Institute for Journalism Open Campus Pennsylvania Newsmedia Assocation Report for America Staunton Farm Foundation The Benter Foundation The Grable Foundation The Heinz Endowments The Institute for Nonprofit News The Jefferson Regional Foundation The Miami Foundation The Pittsburgh Foundation The Posner Foundation of Pittsburgh The Pulitzer Center Wyncote Foundation *Public Source will disclose funding sources on the “Who supports us?” webpage and in relevant stories for as long as the funding is being used or for one year, whichever is longer. Beyond that, any funder or donor that has given a one-time gift of $100,000 or more to Public Source in its history will continue to be listed on the “Who supports us?” webpage as a past supporter for one year past the funding being used. **Public Source received COVID-19 employee retention credit funding in 2021-22. Bridge Builders The following individuals have made gifts of $1,000 or more to Public Source in the last year. Joaquin Alvarado Ted Anthony Georgia Berner Nancy Bernstein The Rosalind Chow and Jeff Galak Charitable Fund Maria Guyette Janice Harrison Laura Heberton-Shlomchik & Mark Shlomchik Harry Hochheiser & Judith Yanowitz Mike & Flowe Hout Megan Hull Dean Jackson & Kelly Metzler The Scott and Susan Lammie Charitable Fund Ariel Leath & Edward Mitchell Caroline Mitchell Stephen Okamoto Dr. Katy & Chris Peplin Taylor Jade Powell Matthew W. Quigley and Nina B. Quigley The Prairiewood Fund Martin & Solveig Rafanan Robert and Janet Squires Kate & Richard St. John Zak Thomas Layne and Emily Vaden Michael Wagner Allan Willinger & Jo Schlesinger Roselyn Wilkinson Community sponsors, advertisers and corporate matching These community organizations have sponsored a Public Source program, advertised through our publication or matched a donor’s gift: Allegheny Parks Foundation Altria Apple BikePGH Bradbury-Sullivan LGBTQ Community Center Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh Chatham University: Pennsylvania Center for Women & Politics Children's Museum of Pittsburgh City of Bridges Community Land Trust Comcast Contemporary Craft Deckers Film Pittsburgh Goodwill Southwestern Pennsylvania Google Handmade Arcade Kelly Strayhorn Theater Literacy Pittsburgh Mobilify PASA Sustainable Agriculture Pennsylvania Women Work Pittsburgh Arts and Lectures Pittsburgh Hispanic Development Corporation REALTORS® Association of Metropolitan Pittsburgh Rivers of Steel Silver Eye Center for Photography Sustainable Pittsburgh and CEO's for Sustainability The Allegheny County Library Association The Dick Thornburgh Forum for Law and Public Policy Three Rivers Waterkeeper Tim Gyves, Compass Real Estate Women for a Healthy Environment Media sponsorships Public Source serves as a media sponsor for the following organizations and is compensated for this sponsorship through in-kind trades and publicity: 412 Food Rescue BELT Magazine BikePGH Boys & Girls Clubs of Western Pennsylvania Doors Open Pittsburgh Emmaus Community of Pittsburgh Film Pittsburgh GlobalPittsburgh® Greater Pittsburgh Nonprofit Partnership (GPNP) Pennsylvania Climate Convergence Pittsburgh Arts and Lectures Pittsburgh Glass Center Pittsburgh Opera Pittsburgh Recovery Walk University of Pittsburgh School of Law Center for Civil Rights and Social Justice Western Pennsylvania Bleeding Disorders Foundation About Public Source About Newsletters Contact us Send tips & ideas Advertise with us Donate Membership FAQs Republishing guidelines Our partners Board of Directors Jobs Working with us