Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts Do you have opinions on medical marijuana? The Department of Health wants to know. by PublicSource contributor June 2, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pennsylvania is crafting the first phase of temporary medical marijuana regulations, Health Secretary Karen Murphy announced yesterday, and it’s seeking public input on the new rules. The first round of regulations will focus on growers and processors and on setting up a temporary framework to make medical marijuana available to patients under 18. The department hopes to gather public input on the regulations through a series of online surveys available on its site. Jeannette Ward, director of data and marketing for the marijuana consulting firm MJ Freeway, told The Morning Call that involving the public is unique and signals the department’s flexibility. Murphy said in a statement : Our vision is to have a high quality, efficient, and compliant medical marijuana program for Pennsylvania residents with serious medical conditions as defined by Act 16. We are also committed to being transparent and communicating effectively throughout the process with the public, stakeholders, and our partners, and are very interested in their feedback as we develop temporary regulations. The Department of Health took the reigns after Gov. Tom Wolf signed Senate Bill 3 into law on April 17, legalizing medical cannabis . The law took effect last month, and Murphy said permanent regulations will be implemented within two years. For now, the Department of Health is establishing temporary regulations to begin implementation. The first set of these regulations will draw from the department’s first public opinion survey, available on its site until June 15. This set of questions is specific to growers and processors and asks for input on growing facilities, vehicles and containers used in transporting medical cannabis and requirements for market sale. Each month, a new survey will be online for two weeks, according to York Dispatch . Upcoming surveys will address dispensaries, physicians, patients, caregivers and laboratories, according to the Department of Health. The department estimates this process will be finished by the end of the calendar year. A panel of experts, selected by Gov. Wolf and legislative leaders, will approve the final regulations alongside the Independent Regulatory Review Commission, a state agency that reviews regulations. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting When the regulations are completed, the state will offer medical cannabis to patients who are residents of Pennsylvania and under a physician’s care for the treatment of a serious medical condition as defined by Act 16 . Reach Courtney Linder at clinder@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @CNL_13 . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI