Posted in Inside our Newsroom Year-end reflections from PublicSource staff on the never-ending year that was 2020 by Andy Kubis and Jourdan Hicks December 31, 2020 February 25, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Jay Manning, PublicSource's visual storyteller and producer, Jennie Liska, director of loyalty programs, and Naomi Harris, our new higher education reporter whose position is made possible through partnership with Open Campus. This year has been called many things: exhausting, chaotic, uncertain, unprecedented, surreal, etc. We’re nine months in, and all of these words still apply. In the last week of 2020, as we are shifting our attention to the new year, I sat down with three PublicSource team members for candid interviews. The topics we covered ranged from finding your workflow during the pandemic to building relationships with new team members over Zoom. For this episode we’re turning the microphone to my PublicSource colleagues. You’ll meet Jennie Liska, director of loyalty programs, Naomi Harris, our new higher education reporter, and Jay Manning, visual storyteller and producer. First up, Jay Manning. Jay is a visual storyteller and producer at PublicSource. A Brazilian martial arts fighter and musician, Jay brings a lot of creativity and passion to our newsroom, and that has come through to you, our readers, in the form of his photos and video work. For Part 2, Naomi Harris shares how she has started as a higher education reporter at PublicSource in November during the pandemic and has met only one of her colleagues in person so far. A fan of anime, Naomi talks about her research and sourcing for the upcoming stories on localizing college debt. For Part 3, Jennie Liska, PublicSource’s director of loyalty programs, talks how she has navigated this year as a working mom of two kids, both of them are not even 10. An avid reader, Jennie talks about how lines have blurred between work and home and how our team has worked to serve our readers when the times called for it. Enjoy. And Happy New Year. Please get in touch with ideas for 2021 at jourdan@publicsource.org . Jourdan Hicks is a community correspondent at PublicSource. She can be reached at jourdan@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Jourdan Hicks jourdan@publicsource.org instagram Jourdan is a senior community correspondent at PublicSource. Previously, Jourdan was engaged as a community-based educator in the Hazelwood section of the city. A lifelong Pittsburgh resident, she’s... More by Jourdan Hicks