Posted in Equity Grab a brush, take a stand. 10 Pittsburgh Solidarity for Change murals are going up in the next month by NEXTpittsburgh staff September 30, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Photo by Kristy Locklin This story was originally published by NEXTpittsburgh , a news partner of PublicSource. NEXTPittsburgh is an online publication about the people advancing the region and the innovative and cool things happening here. Sign up to get NEXTpittsburgh free. When Kyle Holbrook paints a mural, he wants to do more than beautify a neighborhood; he wants to make people think . Spurred by his own experiences with police brutality and the Black Lives Matter movement, the Homewood resident and executive artist of the Moving the Lives of Kids Community Mural Project is mobilizing other like-minded artists, college students and community members to design and create a series of art walls promoting unity and social justice. Over the next month, 10 Pittsburgh Solidarity for Change murals will go up throughout the city, including works in Oakland, Uptown, the Hill District, the Strip District and Sharpsburg. The public is invited to lend a hand by visiting the website or sending an email to the organizers. (Photo by Kristy Locklin) On Sept. 26, the first community painting party was held at the corner of South Bouquet and Joncaire streets in Oakland. Throughout the day, people grabbed brushes, and while maintaining social distancing guidelines, added splashes of color, messages of hope and names of loved ones lost to gun violence to a retaining wall owned by the Oakland Planning and Development Corporation . Holbrook and Kara Dyer, a senior criminology student at Carlow University, designed the huge text mural that reads “Equality, Action and Accountability”. “It’s important to create solutions,” says Dyer, of the Hill District, who wants to help ex-offenders find jobs when she graduates. Fellow students and faculty members from Carlow University’s Social Justice Institutes joined her at the Oakland site. (Photo by Kristy Locklin) Joseph Roberts, a criminology and psychology professor at Carlow, says his pupils are researching pertinent issues, such as systemic racism and gun violence, to create content for QR codes that will be included in each mural. Using a smartphone, passersby can scan the codes and read the information. “We were thinking of ways or ideas or imagery that combats racism, police brutality and bigotry,” participating artist Max Gonzales says. “It’s a real-time response to the current state of our country.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI