Posted in HEALTH Facts about hepatitis C by Alexandra Kanik December 15, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Hepatitis C is the most common blood-borne infection in the United States, affecting an estimated 3.2 million people. The virus mainly affects the liver and can lead to cirrhosis (liver scarring) and liver cancer. Hepatitis C is the leading cause of liver transplants in the U.S. It is transmitted when an infected person’s blood enters the bloodstream of another person. You should be tested if: you were born between 1945 and 1965, regardless of other risk factors you’ve used intravenous or intranasal drugs even once you’ve engaged in anal intercourse or vigorous, unprotected sex with multiple partners you had a transfusion of blood or blood products, like plasma, before 1992 you are or have been on hemodialysis you got a tattoo or piercing in a non-sterile environment you have sex or share personal care items, like a razor or toothbrush, with someone who has hepatitis C To get tested: Ask your healthcare provider if you are eligible for the hepatitis C antibody test. A few Southwest PA sites that screen for hepatitis C are: Mercy Behavioral Health, 1200 Reedsdale St., Pittsburgh Central Outreach, 1860 Centre Ave., Pittsburgh Butler Community Health Clinic, 103 Bonnie Drive, Butler To learn about prescription assistance programs, visit: For Harvoni or Sovaldi, http://www.gilead.com/responsibility/us-patient-access For Viekira Pak, http://www.abbviepaf.org/ For Olysio, www.JanssenPrescriptionAssistance.com For more information on hepatitis C, visit: Help-4-Hep: http://www.help4hep.org/ Caring Ambassadors hepatitis C program: www.hepcchallenge.org CDC Division of Viral Hepatitis: www.cdc.gov/knowmorehepatitis HCV Advocate: www.hcvadvocate.org Hepatitis C Association: www.hepcassoc.org FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Drug abuse and rehabilitation , Resource