Posted in Education Pittsburgh, what’s YOUR college debt story? by Naomi Harris December 14, 2020 December 16, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photo via Unsplash) (Photo via Unsplash) Politicians and pundits have started talking about the overwhelming problem of student debt and what to do about the $1.6 trillion that Americans collectively owe. Recently, President-elect Joe Biden spoke about his support for student loan forgiveness that could offer $10,000 in relief and has said that canceling some of the $1.6 trillion in student debt is part of his economic recovery plan. But we realize that this is a national issue with local concerns. PublicSource wants to report on how college debt has impacted the lives of Pittsburgh residents and we need your help. How have college loans factored into your financial decision-making? Do you believe $10,000 is enough or too little relief? How has college debt impacted your life overall? We want to hear your stories and learn how student debt has been affecting you. Tell us about your experience borrowing money for college and what it is like to have student loans. Please fill out the survey and leave us your contact information so we can reach back out and talk to you. Your replies will be read only by our higher education reporter and editors. ﻿ Loading… ﻿ Loading… Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram