Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts PublicSource staff recognized for outstanding work by swalsh October 19, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource reporters Eric Holmberg and Halle Stockton recently won a Truth in Finances award given by the Pennsylvania Institute for Certified Public Accountants. The awards honor reporting that clarifies financial issues or exposes fraudulent activities that affect the wellbeing of individuals, communities or companies in Pennsylvania. Holmberg and Stockton won for their story on the high amounts of overtime hours worked by the nursing staff of the Allegheny-County owned nursing homes and how that could affect the care being given to the elderly residents. Stockton, who is the managing editor of PublicSource as well as a reporter, also received the Yvonne Zanos Excellence in Media Award from ACHIEVA, a Southwestern Pennsylvania nonprofit that serves people with disabilities. The Awards of Excellence are given to honor individuals and organizations who “go above and beyond on behalf of people with disabilities.” Stockton reports and writes about critical disability issues, and PublicSource hosted a community event about work opportunities and wages for people with disabilities last year. Stockton will be honored by ACHIEVA on Dec. 7 at the Sheraton Hotel in Station Square in Pittsburgh. Environmental reporter Natasha Khan received a scholarship to attend a five-day video workshop put on by the Institute for Nonprofit News and the Bay Area Video Coalition in San Francisco, Ca. And, finally, PublicSource was chosen by the Institute for Nonprofit News to participate in a national pilot project called NewsLynx, which will find new ways to both quantitatively and qualitatively measure the impact of journalism . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI