Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 9, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 9, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pennsylvania Pittsburgh: 30 prisoners make list for early release Of the 6,000 federal prisoners that are set to be released at the end of the month, 30 of them will come from the Western District of Pennsylvania. Of the 30 prisoners, 27 are from the Pittsburgh area. The early releases stem from a change in sentencing guidelines. Pittsburgh: Redevelopment in Hazelwood helped by state loan The Regional Industrial Development Corp. of Southwestern Pennsylvania received a $5 million, 15-year loan by the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development. Funds will contribute to renovations of the former LTV Coke and Eliza Works Coke Plant in the Hazelwood neighborhood. Butler County: State will close residential treatment facility The State Department of Human Services is revoking the license of Glade Run Lutheran Services in Zelienople due to allegations of sexual abuse. An investigation found that the facility, which provides treatment for children with mental health conditions, also found inadequate supervision of the children, failure to report missing children and staff members sleeping during shifts. Armstrong County: Warden resigns Armstrong County Jail warden Dave Hogue officially resigned Thursday in response to the July escape of an inmate who allegedly killed a woman while at large. The county prison board said they did not force Hogue to make this decision nor did they intend to fire him. Philadelphia: Gender-neutral bathrooms City Council unanimously approved the bill Thursday requesting that all single-occupancy bathrooms be labeled as gender-neutral. National McCarthy drops out House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy dropped out of the race for House Speaker Thursday and announced his decision in a meeting where House Republicans were set to select their candidate. Current Speaker John Boehner accordingly postponed the vote. States struggle to obtain drugs for executions Death-penalty states are having difficulties locating the proper drugs to be used in cases of lethal injections, causing some executions to be postponed. In January, correction officers in Oklahoma used the wrong drug in the execution of Charles Warner. Clean water fight in Michigan Residents of Flint, Michigan, continue to fight for clean water after a public health emergency was declared last month, advising them not to use the city’s tap water due to elevated levels of lead. Governor Rick Snyder announced Thursday he was in support of a $12 million change that would return Flint to the Great Lakes Water Authority, the city’s previous water supplier. Hero in French train attack stabbed Spencer Stone, one of the Americans who helped stop a terrorist attack on a French train, was stabbed in Sacramento Wednesday night after an altercation downtown. The incident was unrelated to what happened in France. In Other News Facebook’s trending older Retirement-age Americans are rapidly adapting and embracing Facebook , according to a report released Thursday by the Pew Research Center. The daily report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI