Posted in Inside our Newsroom Redefining our mission to deepen journalism and empathy for the Pittsburgh region Pittsburgh’s Public Source enters a new fiscal year — its 15th — with a refined mission and vision, a redoubled commitment and a (slightly) new name. by Halle Stockton and Jennie Ewing Liska August 6, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X On July 22, we got a call. The number was masked and not included in the 2-minute, 9-second voicemail. “I just read this Pittsburgh’s Public Source article about funding for survivor support …” These messages can go a number of ways — questions, suggestions, complaints. All are welcome, though some can be jarring. This one continued: “I’m calling to express my gratitude. … It’s just such an unbelievably important and kind thing to read. The news I do come across is usually very negative … And this is dire information, but to have this put out so plainly … and then I started reading and seeing the headlines about the stuff that I’m facing right now — like Medicare/ Medicaid cuts , state funding cuts and this lack of true human resources.” This person felt seen and served. It’s one of hundreds of messages over the past 14 years that helped refine our mission and theory of change, centering the relationship between journalism and empathy. Our mission Pittsburgh’s Public Source informs and inspires the Pittsburgh region through the power of deep, independent journalism. Our vision Information deepens understanding. Understanding evokes empathy. Empathy strengthens communities and leads to a power structure that’s responsive and accountable to the people. This caller is just the most recent voice to affirm that Public Source journalism is not only informing but also inspiring, offering clarity, relevance and emotional resonance in a media landscape often dominated by disempowering coverage. We’ve seen what our journalism can do . It can change laws and policies. More often, it changes conversations and hearts. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Our vision homes in on those emotional and cultural shifts as the starting point for more tangible impact. That’s why we’re focused on reaching people who may not already seek out news. We want to serve all who need it, where and how they want to consume. We’re trying new things while staying grounded in strong reporting, ethical standards, transparency and a deep commitment to community. When more people are thinking about community issues and civic life, public dialogue advances. A sense of trust follows; the belief takes root that meaningful conversation or even constructive debate is possible. And when people are activated in this way, public pressure builds on the institutions, elected officials and others who make decisions that shape our region. Lajja Mistry, center, K-12 reporter for PublicSource, interviews civics class students at Pittsburgh CAPA 6-12, at the Downtown high school on Wednesday, Sept. 25, 2024. Mistry was researching how schools are approaching misinformation in the 2024 election. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) The caller added in the voicemail: “The neighborhood I live in is not necessarily on board or discussing things like this …” He said he hadn’t realized others in the Pittsburgh area were talking about these issues. But we know many people and groups here are, and they need to be connected to strengthen understanding, well-being and empathy across communities. It’s a reminder of why Public Source must surface critical issues in places and with people too often left out of the conversation. A fresh chapter As we begin a new fiscal year, here’s how this mission is guiding us. Over the past year, we had the rare opportunity to work with a strategic planning specialist to chart our course for 2025–28. Your support — reading, donating, offering feedback, sending story ideas — helped make that possible. Here’s what we’re focused on in the next three years: Deeper local connection. We’re expanding our reach across Pittsburgh’s 90-plus neighborhoods and Allegheny County’s 130 municipalities. You may have seen our North Side neighborhood zine and custom news page , our asset maps of Wilkinsburg and Beechview , and a growing number of stories that emphasize a sense of place. Expect more place-based storytelling rooted in local issues and opportunities. Creative partnerships. As a small team, collaboration is essential. We’re expanding on our history of editorial partnerships to be even more creative about how together we better serve the region. If you know of any kind of local group we should work with, let us know who and why. A stronger foundation. We’re investing in the people behind the journalism: our reporters, editors, visual storytellers, audience and business staff. Growth, for us, isn’t just about doing more. It’s about doing better and doing it sustainably. You’ll also notice a shift in how we talk about ourselves. We’re now Pittsburgh’s Public Source — formerly just PublicSource. A big shake-up, we know. (Kidding. Sort of.) But the change is meaningful to us. The PublicSource staff, Thursday, May 22, 2025, at the Museum Lab on the North Side. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) We see ourselves as a community asset, so we want to signal that more clearly. And we split PublicSource into two words because that’s how most people naturally write our name and those two words mean more. We are the public’s source for journalism in this place we call home. We’ve been referring to this as a glow-up. Our new logo, colors and typefaces reflect the tradition of our role as a public-service news organization and the bold, curious spark that we have to unlock new ways to serve you. Whether you’ve just discovered our work or have followed us for years, we’d love to hear from you. Tell us what you care about. Invite us to your community meeting. Come talk with us at an event. Every voice helps shape what Public Source becomes next. Thanks to the caller for leaving that message with no expectation other than to pass on positive feedback. We would have loved to call back to express our gratitude! Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton Jennie Ewing Liska jennie@publicsource.org Jennie is co-executive director of revenue and operations. She oversees revenue generation and relationship development to support the growth of Public Source and manages internal business operations.... More by Jennie Ewing Liska