Posted in Equity Episode 2, Season 2: How Pittsburgh shapes and cages the experience of Black women. For real. by Andy Kubis and Jourdan Hicks November 24, 2020 April 24, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource community correspondent Jourdan Hicks with Janel Young and Naomi Ritter in July 2020. (Photo illustration by Natasha Vicens/PublicSource) American society is becoming more multi-racial, less binary and more mobile. It’s common for people to ask how you identify. I happen to identify as a Pittsburgher, Black and a Woman. So when last fall the city released a report on Pittsburgh’s inequities across race and gender , the findings were inescapable, disheartening and triggering. I took it personally. PublicSource community correspondent Jourdan Hicks with Janel Young and Naomi Ritter in July 2020. Black women are not monolithic people. The experiences that sculpt our lives matter. How our stories show up in studies observing our quality of life deserves context. On the second episode of From the Source, I spoke with native Pittsburghers, Naomi Ritter and Janel Young about what gets left out of the conversation when discussing Black womanhood in Pittsburgh and unique experiences that shaped and caged their identities. Their reflections are intimate, authentic and fresh takes on how we discuss how Pittsburgh nurtures and shapes Black women. My conversation with Janel and Naomi is the first part in a two-part series about the relationship between the city and self-discovery and development of Black women. Listen to the second episode of From the Source: Season 2 . Jourdan Hicks is a community correspondent at PublicSource. She can be reached at jourdan@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Jourdan Hicks jourdan@publicsource.org instagram Jourdan is a senior community correspondent at PublicSource. Previously, Jourdan was engaged as a community-based educator in the Hazelwood section of the city. A lifelong Pittsburgh resident, she’s... More by Jourdan Hicks