Posted in Equity An Obama Academy student interviews her grandma about civil rights, Malcolm X and ‘being radical’ by Andy Kubis June 16, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Protesters march near Bakery Square on June 1. (Photo by Nick Childers/PublicSource) Mekka Lloyd: If you are comfortable in doing so, I would like for you to state your name, age and where you’re from. Geraldine Akers: My name is Geraldine Young Lloyd Akers. That’s spelled a-k-e-r-s. I am 73 years young. I’m from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Northside area at this time. Mekka Lloyd (Courtesy photo) ML: What do you think of the Black Lives Matter protests? GA: I feel it’s about time. It’s been past time that they stand up and not actually literally fight, but to request for peace and justice for all, all mankind, not just for our race of Black, but no matter what color or skin. ML: Do you think that we are past requesting because for so long we have requested. So what’s your take on that? GA: Yes, we have endured big struggle, big struggle of brutality, abuse and injustice. But with fighting and violence, it still does not accomplish anything. All it does is destroy and tear down. It tears down our morality as being humans and destroying what we need in our communities. ML: Do you understand, though, where someone might be influenced through a “by any means necessary” as Malcolm X has said. GA: Well Malcolm X, as far as my understanding, he wasn’t about violence. He spoke about equality for all, especially Black. Listen to From the Source Episode 13: The student and her grandma, an intergenerational view on civil rights ML: Malcolm X, him and Martin Luther King had very different views. So Malcolm X was more on the, if they were to attack us, which you see a lot of protesters doing now, if they are to attack us, we attack back, especially in a time where churches were being burned and little girls were dying and Black people had no protection for themselves. Malcolm X believes, like the Black Panthers did, that you can use force because, you know, because they’re using it against you. So he wasn’t violent himself, per se, but he did believe in violence as an instrument to fight and… GA: To retaliate? Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting ML: Yes. GA: Well, I believe in you know, you have to protect yourself. I mean, it would be unwise to stand there and let somebody just beat on you if you’re able to, you know, fight back. Now if you have a group of people that’s coming at you to try to destroy you, to hurt you, harm you, then one person alone wouldn’t have much odds at protecting themselves. But I’m not saying that you shouldn’t protect yourself. I’m saying don’t create it. Don’t create the violence. ML: I have a question. How do you feel about me protesting? GA: Well you know, as being your nana, how I feel. Cause there’s so much dangers out there, anything can happen. You cannot foresee nothing. I really don’t want you to be out there, but I understand why you’re out there. If I was younger, I would’ve been out there, too. If I was younger. I really would be out there. ML: Interesting. Interesting. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI