Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts West Virginia researchers find no issue with radioactivity in PA creek by Natasha Khan September 2, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X In the ongoing quest to solve the mystery of what’s in Ten Mile Creek, recent test results from samples taken by West Virginia scientists show radioactivity levels are safe. “We looked hard and just could not find any evidence of harmful radiation levels,” Dr. Paul Ziemkiewicz, director of the West Virginia Water Research Institute, said in a statement . Ziemkiewicz’s team sampled the Clyde Mine discharge that feeds into Ten Mile Creek, a main tributary to the Monongahela River in Greene County, six times over a two week period in late July. None of the results showed radioactivity levels exceeding safe drinking water standards. Initial 2014 Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection samples showed radium levels well above drinking water standards. It was these results that prompted two local environmental groups to push the DEP to open up an investigation into radioactivity levels in the creek. A June 5 PublicSource story said that the DEP would investigate whether there are radioactive elements in Ten Mile Creek and the Clyde Mine discharge and look at possible links to nearby shale gas drilling. In late June, the DEP took 35 water, soil, fish and plant samples at different points along the creek and mine discharge. They also tested the Tri County Municipal Water Authority, located downstream on the Monongahela River. The DEP has said they’ll have results of those tests sometime in September. The DEP seems to have used imprecise methods for its 2014 sampling that could have shown inaccurate results, Ziemkiewicz said in the statement. The DEP admitted they used a less-accurate method testing called gamma spectroscopy for the 2014 testing, but are analyzing the most recent June samples using EPA-approved methods. There are other researchers, including Duke University scientists , testing Ten Mile and the surrounding area for radioactive elements and other chemicals associated with Marcellus Shale drilling. Ken Dufalla, president of the Greene County chapter of the Izaak Walton League, told the Observer-Reporter he wants to wait to see all of the test results before drawing any conclusions. “Don’t jump the gun,” Dufalla told the news outlet. “Let’s hope WWRI is correct, but we’re going to wait until all data is in and we can analyze it so we know for sure.” Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan