Posted in Aftermath: Synagogue attack , PUBLIC SAFETY PHOTOS: Thousands gather for vigils after the synagogue massacre in Squirrel Hill by Natasha Khan October 28, 2018 November 19, 2018 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A vigil was held at the intersection of Forbes and Murray Avenue in Squirrel Hill on Saturday night. The vigil, organized by students from nearby Taylor Allderdice High School, was attended by thousands of people. (Photo by Healther Mull for PublicSource) Thousands of people gathered for vigils this weekend to mourn the loss of life in the attack against the Tree of Life synagogue, believed to be the deadliest attack against Jews in U.S. history. A shooter identified as Robert Bowers , 46, killed 11 people, and injured six others, four of whom were police officers. Bowers entered the synagogue during the Shabbat services around 9:45 a.m. on Saturday. The medical examiner’s office of Allegheny County on Sunday released the names of the victims gunned down during the attack: Joyce Fienberg, 75, of Oakland; Richard Gottfried, 65, of Ross Township; Rose Mallinger, 97, of Squirrel Hill; Jerry Rabinowitz, 66, of Edgewood Borough; Cecil Rosenthal, 59, of Squirrel Hill, and David Rosenthal, 54, of Squirrel Hill (Cecil and David were brothers); Bernice Simon, 84, and Sylvan Simon, 86, of Wilkinsburg (Bernice and Sylvan were husband and wife); Daniel Stein, 71, of Squirrel Hill; Melvin Wax, 88, of Squirrel Hill; Irving Younger, 69, of Mt. Washington. Bowers was charged with 11 state counts of criminal homicide, six counts of aggravated assault and 13 counts of ethnic intimidation. Federal prosecutors filed 29 counts against Bowers, according to Associated Press. Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto during a press conference on Sunday thanked law enforcement officials, paramedics from Pittsburgh and from the region who came to help. “We will get through this darkest hour in Pittsburgh’s history by working together,” he said. On Saturday night, Allderdice High School students organized a vigil in Squirrel Hill. On Sunday night, more than 2,000 people gathered for the Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum vigil. Leaders of the Muslim and Christian communities of Pittsburgh spoke at the vigil. Wasi Mohamed, executive director of the Islamic Center of Pittsburgh, said Muslims raised more than $70,000 for the Jewish community in two days. Below are images from Sunday’s vigil at Soldiers and Sailors. (Photos by Daniel Barnhill and Heather Mull/PublicSource) Inside the Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum, people gathered Sunday evening for the interfaith vigil to honor the victims of the synagogue shooting in Squirrel Hill. Rabbi Cheryl Klein of the Dor Hadash Congregation, one of three congregations that share the Tree of Life Synagogue, speaks with a congregant inside the Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum. Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto spoke during the Sunday vigil calling for the eradication of hate. “We will drive anti-Semitism and the hate of any people back to the basement, on their computer and away from the open discussions and dialogues around this city, around this state and around this country,” he said. Leaders of the Muslim and Christian communities of Pittsburgh spoke at the vigil Sunday night. Wasi Mohamed, executive director of the Islamic Center of Pittsburgh, said Muslims raised more than $70,000 for Jewish community in two days. The interfaith vigil at Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Inside the Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum, people gathered on Sunday evening to honor the victims of the synagogue shooting in Squirrel Hill. Some of those who gathered at Sunday evening’s vigil held posters urging civic engagement and actions against hate. Outside Sunday evening’s vigil at Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum. Outside the Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum, people gathered in the rain for Sunday’s interfaith vigil. Outside the Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum, people gathered under umbrellas for the interfaith vigil. Outside the Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum, people gathered under umbrellas for the interfaith vigil. Thousands showed up to Sunday’s interfaith vigil. People gathered outside before Sunday’s interfaith vigil. People gathered in the rain outside Soldiers and Sailors on Sunday evening before the vigil to honor Saturday’s victims. *** Scenes near the Tree of Life synagogue in Squirrel Hill on Sunday afternoon. (Photos by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) Dawn Schempp, 45, of Munhall, leaves flowers at a memorial at the intersection of Murray and Wilkins avenues in Squirrel Hill. Amanda Yu, 13, of Squirrel Hill, ties a sign that says “Praying” in Hebrew to a post near a memorial at the intersection of Murray and Wilkins avenues with her mom, Julia Kaufmann. Investigators work on Wilkins Avenue in Squirrel Hill near the Tree of Life synagogue on Sunday afternoon. Notes and flowers are left at a memorial at the intersection of Murray and Wilkins avenues in Squirrel Hill. *** Here are some of the moments photographer Heather Mull captured during the vigil on Saturday night. A man chants verses from the Torah in front of a shrine of lit candles on Shady Avenue outside the Tree of Life synagogue. Victoria Wosher, who lives nears the Tree of Life Synagogue, lights candles and mourns at a makeshift shrine on Shady Avenue at 9:45 p.m. Saturday, twelve hours after the deadly attack on the Treet of Life synagogue in Squirrel Hill. anti-semitic gunman Robert Bowers, armed with an assault rifle and 3 handguns, entered the Tree of Life synagogue in Squirrel Hill. Wosher said she was deeply shaken and saddened by the shooting and loss of life. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan