Posted in On the beat , posts Two Senate races that are flooding the airwaves with ads by Natasha Khan September 19, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X If you think 15,000 ads in 10 weeks of the Pennsylvania governor’s race is a lot, check out what’s happening in the Iowa and Michigan Senate races. TV viewers in those two states saw a Senate political ad once every two minutes during the second week of September. Iowa and Michigan are both hotly contested races because the incumbent Democrats in both states are retiring and the battle for control of the Senate is predicted to be very close. That roughly 4,500 ads about each Senate race, according to data obtained by the Center for Public Integrity from Kantar Media/CMAG, an ad tracking service. The second week in September was also the most active week of TV advertising for the campaigns of Gov. Tom Corbett and opponent Tom Wolf in the Pennsylvania governor’s race. The two candidates spent a combined $1.3 million on ads from Sept. 8 to Sept. 15. This was the highest weekly total of the general election so far. Back in Iowa, voters may be seeing so many ads because it’s cheaper for national organizations to advertise there than in larger TV markets across the country. From the story : Voters have been “inundated with advertising,” said Barbara Trish, a professor of political science at Grinnell College in Iowa. “You can pretty much saturate [Iowa],” she added, “for a lot less money” than many other parts of the country. In the Michigan Senate race, billionaire environmentalist Tom Steyer’s super PAC, NextGen Climate Action Committee, aired more ads — about 1,500 of them — than the candidates did last week. Steyer’s ads have primarily attacked the Republican candidate, former Michigan Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land, in her bid to defeat Democratic Rep. Gary Peters. In July, Steyer’s PAC ran negative ads in Pennsylvania against Corbett. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan