Board of Directors at Pittsburgh’s Public Source Public Source board members are passionate about local journalism and the role that the free press plays in our democratic society. They also understand why journalism must bring an equity lens to reporting. Board members support Public Source’s mission to produce journalism for a better Pittsburgh by providing governance, fiscal oversight, advocacy, mentorship and support. We are grateful for their leadership and expertise. Our board members Ted Anthony is the global director of new storytelling and newsroom innovation for The Associated Press, based in Pittsburgh and New York. He has reported from more than 25 countries, from North Korea to Myanmar to China to Russia. From 2014 to 2018, he was AP’s Asia-Pacific news director, based in Bangkok and overseeing coverage by more than 200 journalists. He is a native of Allison Park and a graduate of Falk Elementary School, Hampton High School and Penn State University. Jeff Ballou is a Washington, D.C.-based producer for ABC News. He was previously a news editor for the Americas with Al Jazeera Media Network’s English language channel and has spent over 30 years in journalism working at such places as NPR, CSPAN, WTOP-AM, Hubbard Broadcasting and FOX television station WTTG-TV. A Homewood-Brushton and later Highland Park native, he attended, Fulton Elementary, Sterrett Classical Academy, Reizenstein Middle and Taylor Allderdice High Schools. Josie Cellone started as a reporter, with internships at NPR, the Washington Post and the Associated Press, and ultimately served as a Pittsburgh Tribune-Review city editor. She bridged her experience into digital marketing and e-commerce at various companies including Heinz, PPG and Bob Evans Restaurants and launching an interactive children’s book startup. Jeff Galak is associate professor of marketing and, by courtesy, social and decision science at Carnegie Mellon University. His research involves the understanding of human decision making and human happiness. He is enthusiastic about educating everyone on the proper use of data to navigate the complexities of this world. He lives in Pittsburgh with his brilliant wife, goofball daughter and carefree son. Jon Hoffman leads the team at Elevate NP of Southwest Pennsylvania to assess the capacity needs of nonprofit organizations across the region and connect them to resources that help them achieve their missions. His experience includes management and strategy consulting, program and executive leadership in human services, and statewide housing advocacy. Scott Lammie is retired from UPMC where he spent 30 years in key business, financial and operational leadership positions. He remains active in volunteer leadership capacities with nonprofit education, economic development and community service organizations, including The Altruism in Medicine Institute, The Forbes Funds, Fred Rogers Productions, Manchester Bidwell Corporation, The Sister Thea Bowman Foundation, The Citizens Science Lab, Propel Schools Foundation, Phipps Conservatory & Botanical Gardens, and United Way of Southwestern Pennsylvania. James O’Toole is a senior newsroom engineer at The Washington Post, where he focuses on developing software to enable new forms of reporting and data journalism. He previously served as a software engineer in Pittsburgh city government, where he worked on the city’s open data program, and as an award-winning reporter at CNN, covering finance and technology. James grew up in Mt. Lebanon in a family of journalists, and is currently based in Washington. Maggie Patterson is a professor of journalism at Duquesne University, an author of several books and a former reporter for The Pittsburgh Press. Zakarij O. Thomas is a partner at Sitko Bruno, LLC, concentrating his practice in all aspects of commercial real estate law. Previously, Zak was a senior attorney at Buchanan, Ingersoll & Rooney, PC, and program officer for community development and lending through a partnership between Local Initiatives Support Corp (LISC) and Neighborhood Allies. He is a founding board member of The Chuck Cooper Foundation and serves on the Urban Redevelopment Authority’s Real Estate Loan Review Committee, Micro-Enterprise Loan Committee and Business Loan Review Committee. Lauren Trocano is the director of employee communications for Comcast’s Keystone Region where she specializes in employee engagement, change management and special events. She previously held corporate communications positions with GSK Consumer Healthcare and Bayer Corporation and worked for several public relations agencies and as a freelance communications consultant. She’s an active “big” with Big Brothers Big Sisters of Greater Pittsburgh. Guillermo Velázquez is the Executive Director of the Pittsburgh Hispanic Development Corporation (PHDC), with a mission in business incubation, housing, employment, investment, training, and career development. Mr. Velázquez has an MBA in global management and business administration from Point Park University and a bachelor’s degree in business relations, marketing, and international business. He holds a computer systems diploma and an English diploma as a second language. He is fluent in Spanish, English, Portuguese, Italian, and French. Joining the Public Source Board of Directors At times, the Public Source board seeks to fill open seats within its ranks and always values meeting community members who may be interested in learning more about the board. Board members are voted upon by the membership to serve three-year terms and can serve a maximum of three consecutive terms. Public Source board members : are well connected to communities and can act as ambassadors both of communities and Public Source; bring a willingness to collaborate with staff to execute Public Source strategy; work with staff and board to finalize annual budgets and provide fiscal oversight; actively serve on a board committee; support Public Source efforts through event participation, sponsorship and other opportunities to extend reach; and, identify other potential board members. Click here to apply Please address any questions to info@publicsource.org . About Public Source About Newsletters Contact us Send tips & ideas Advertise with us Donate Membership FAQs Republishing guidelines Our partners Board of Directors Jobs Working with us