Posted in Daily report , posts June 17, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 17, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: FBI investigating possible hate crime Five men have been charged with beating a man and breaking several bones in his face at the downtown T station, but now the federal authorities will determine whether the attack constitutes a hate crime. Lycoming County: DEP fines Range Resources $8.9 million Range Resources has been ordered to pay a fine for failing to fix one of its Marcellus shale gas wells. The DEP says the well has contaminated groundwater and private wells in the area, and the company failed to submit satisfactory plans to correct the problem. Philadelphia: Ongoing grudge against Uber The Philadelphia Parking Authority has conducted numerous sting operations against the ride-sharing company and has impounded 42 of its vehicles. Uber has appeared in Philadelphia courts 14 times; each time, the judge has ruled against Uber. Bethlehem Township: A $350,000 budget for new bathrooms At a meeting on Monday, the Board of Commissioners authorized a grant application they’d put toward building new bathrooms at an athletic complex. The decision angered residents who have floodwater in their homes and who believe the money should be spent on fixing the water problems. Statewide: Schools will raise taxes next year According to a survey conducted last month, 70 percent of Pennsylvania schools that responded will need to raise their taxes next year due to insufficient state funding. Additionally, some schools will cut staff, offer furloughs, freeze hiring and reduce extracurricular programs to save money. NATIONAL St. Louis Cardinals and MLB subpoenaed The FBI and Justice Department are investigating the Cardinals on allegations that officials hacked the Houston Astros system and stole player personnel data. Trades, proprietary statistics and scouting reports were compromised. Major League Baseball is cooperating with the investigation. Donald Trump all fired up On Tuesday, Donald Trump finally announced his candidacy for president after teasing it for years. He revealed his campaign from his Trump Tower office in New York City, and now brings the GOP field to 12. Rain-stricken Texas deals with Tropical Storm Bill In the next two to three days, Texas will see between six and 10 inches of rain. In a part of the state that annually sees 40 inches of rain a year, Gainesville took on 34 inches in the past 60 days. With reservoirs already full, the incoming rain has nowhere to go. Chicago Blackhawks win the Stanley Cup… again It’s their third in six years . Due to inclement weather, the cup actually arrived late to the arena. IN OTHER NEWS Festival of foam When a drunken Marine inadvertently set off the fire suppression system near a military aircraft, he unleashed a deluge of snowy foam across the hangar, and he’s not alone. The Naval Research Laboratory reports incidents of false fire activation in all branches of the military. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.