Posted in Daily report , posts August 5, 2015 by PublicSource contributor August 5, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Elsie Hillman dies at 89 Hillman, a philanthropist and former Republican National Committeewoman, has died . She is known for her influence in the elections of former President George H.W. Bush and former Gov. Tom Ridge, and for her support of diversity in public office. She is featured in this PublicSource video about Pittsburgh women in politics. The Hillman Foundation contributes funding to PublicSource . Pittsburgh: Museum looks into doctor’s donations The Carnegie Museum of Natural History will review two stuffed crocodiles and an alligator donated by Jan C. Seski, a doctor who is being investigated for poaching in Zimbabwe. Some airlines have also decided to ban the transportation of wildlife trophies. Pittsburgh: Nonprofit goes after steelmaker PennEnvironment has given ArcelorMittal a 60-day notice that they intend to sue for alleged violations of the Clean Air Act. The company’s coke plant, which PennEnvironment says has a “track record of illegal pollution,” is located in city suburbs. Pittsburgh: Changes in police force coming soon Police Chief Cameron McLay announced an increase in ‘violence prevention detectives’ and efforts toward better partnership between police zones and the city. The homicide rate has been falling, he said, but shootings and gun assaults have spiked. Western PA: Homes still without power Powerful storms on Monday evening knocked out power for many residents. Duquesne Light was still restoring electricity to many homes in the region on Tuesday. Harrisburg: Former chief of staff announces U.S. Senate bid Katie McGinty formally announced her bid to run for the seat, currently held by U.S. Sen. Pat Toomey, on Tuesday. She has served as chief of staff to Gov. Tom Wolf, and the video that she released with her announcement underscores her middle-class roots. Harrisburg: Blocker nominated to head state police Gov. Tom Wolf nominated Tyree C. Blocker as commissioner of the Pennsylvania State Police earlier this week, and he will serve as acting commissioner as he awaits confirmation from the Senate.. The position is currently held by Marcus Brown , who the Senate did not confirm. Allentown: Investigation of theme park underway OSHA is investigating Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom after an employee’s hospitalization last month. Back in December, the administration cited Cedar Fair, the company that owns the park, for failing to protect workers from heat hazards and illness. NATIONAL The GOP presidential hopefuls that get to debate Fox News conducted a poll to choose 10 of the 17 major Republican candidates to get a spot in the first formal debate of the 2016 primary season, which will take place on Thursday. Suspect in Memphis cop shooting turns himself in Tremaine Wilbourn, who is suspected of shooting Officer Sean Bolton over the weekend, turned himself over to authorities Monday night. Wilbourn was on a supervised release after being convicted of bank robbery. New Hampshire tent collapse Safety officials are investigating a circus tent in Lancaster after it collapsed during a storm on Monday. Dozens were injured, and a father and daughter died. IN OTHER NEWS Michigan bookstore gives refunds for “Go Set a Watchman” Brilliant Books in Michigan is offering refunds to customers who bought Harper Lee’s “Go Set a Watchman.” The bookseller suggested readers view the book as “an academic insight rather than as a nice summer novel.” FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.