Posted in Daily report , posts July 3, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 3, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Harrisburg: Wolf vetoes liquor privatization bill Gov. Tom Wolf vetoed the bill that would have put beer and liquor at grocery stores and gas stations. He said he’d rather modernize the existing system. Read more about that and the budget negotiations here . Pittsburgh: Attorney General sues operator of 14 nursing homes Fourteen Golden Living Centers are being sued by the office of Attorney General Kathleen Kane for inadequate staffing and care of its elderly residents. The nursing home chain is accused of  deceiving Department of Health inspectors, falsifying reports and not performing basic care. PublicSource wrote about the Golden Living Center in Lancaster, Pa., in December. Washington County: Your judge on drugs Robert Urwin was convicted of a 1977 murder four years ago. His nonjury trial was settled by Judge Paul Pozonsky, who has admitted to stealing and using cocaine confiscated as evidence. Urwin’s trial overlapped with Pozonsky’s use, so Urwin’s requesting a new trial with a judge from a different county. Pittsburgh: Unpaid gambling debts The City of Pittsburgh is suing the Intergovernmental Cooperation Authority for failing to turn over $11 million of in-state gambling money . The ICA was supposed to have paid its $10 million annual dues to the city by July 1. It also owes more than $1 million so far this year. Pittsburgh: Choosing the color of the Three Sister bridges The Andy Warhol, Roberto Clemente and Rachel Carson bridges need new paint jobs to fend off rust. Mayor Bill Peduto asked the public to vote on a poll concerning the color choice — will it be the iconic Pittsburgh Yellow (Aztec Gold), silver or green? Yellow’s winning, but the poll closes today; get your vote in . Philadelphia: Cigarette taxes enough to fund schools Last October, Philly instituted a $2 per pack cigarette tax, and it collected more than $45 million in revenue. The state is keeping $700,000, but the rest goes to Philadelphia city schools, supplying them with a lot of their budget. NATIONAL No evidence of shooting at Washington Navy Yard The scene of a 2013 killing spree, an individual at the Washington Navy Yard called 911 early Thursday morning claiming to hear gunfire. After authorities investigated, an “all clear” was issued around 10 a.m. Police found no evidence of a shooter or weapons. BP settles with Gulf states On Thursday, Louisiana, Florida, Alabama and Mississippi agreed to a settlement of $18.7 billion to be paid by BP for damages from the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill . Train carrying toxic chemicals derails near Knoxville, Tenn. On Wednesday night, one tank car on a CSX rail line derailed and burst into flames . About 5,000 people living nearby were evacuated, and 10 first responders were hospitalized. The train was also carrying crude oil; read more about crude oil derailments here . One for the Democrats Former Virginia Sen. Jim Webb announced on Thursday that he’d add his name to the Democratic presidential candidate pool. IN OTHER NEWS A breakdown of PA’s troublesome fireworks laws Pennsylvania laws prohibit residents from buying fireworks that leave the ground . Fireworks stores ask for IDs like you’re in a bar, so only out-of-state people can buy mortars and bottle rockets (after they sign a waiver saying they’ll take the fireworks back to their home state). PA’s grounded fireworks law went into effect in 1939, and has been inconveniencing amateur pyrotechnicians ever since. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.