Posted in Daily report , posts Aug. 7, 2013 by PublicSource contributor August 7, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Harrisburg: Attorney General Kathleen Kane formally indicted Kane has been charged with perjury, official oppression, obstruction of justice and contempt of court. Gov. Tom Wolf called for her to resign. Philadelphia: Narcotics officer booted a second time Perry Betts was one of six narcotics officers who was acquitted of federal corruption charges , which included racketeering and conspiracy. But he failed a drug test required for him to rejoin the police, so he will be suspended on Monday and likely dismissed. Allentown: Residents confront City Council The FBI seized the materials of Allentown Mayor Ed Pawlowski and various City Hall staff members about a month ago, but nobody has been charged with anything. Community activists have called for the resignations of Pawlowski and some City Council members. Harrisburg: New director of state homeland security Gov. Tom Wolf’s nominee for state police commissioner, Col. Marcus Brown , has been appointed as the new director. The Senate voted not to confirm Brown as police commissioner because his state police experience was in Maryland. The homeland security position does not go through Senate confirmation hearings. Beaver County: Groups appeal DEP permits to Shell The Department of Environmental Protection granted Royal Dutch Shell the air permit to build a petrochemical plant in Beaver. The Clean Air Council and Environmental Integrity Project have both appealed the grant to the Environmental Hearing Board, claiming that the permit doesn’t prevent Shell from producing further air pollution. Statewide: Economists question Republicans’ claims about severance tax Senate Republican Joe Scarnati commented on WITF that Gov. Tom Wolf’s proposed severance tax would put 250,000 people out of work (while only about 89,000 Pennsylvanians work in the industry). Economists doubt this claim, though. They acknowledge some jobs might be lost, but not enough to wipe out the industry. NATIONAL Japan remembers Thursday marked the 70th anniversary of the atomic devastation of Hiroshima in World War II. The second bomb was dropped three days later on Nagasaki, effectively ending the war in Japan. First Republican debates Two debates were held on Thursday night, a 5 p.m. event featuring seven of the candidates and a 9 p.m. event featuring the bigger names (and crowd of 10): Donald Trump, Jeb Bush and Scott Walker. Jon Stewart departs ‘The Daily Show’ “The world is demonstrably worse than when I started,” Stewart said on his Wednesday night show . “Have I caused this?” The satirist ended his 16-year run on Thursday night. IN OTHER NEWS Musician discerns humpback whale’s calls Male humpback whales don’t just make wailing calls, but actually sing. They’re capable of composing unique songs. Katy Payne, a musician first and biologist second, was the one who figured out that whales write harmonies with the others around them. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.