Posted in Education July 2021 ‘By the Book’ PGH K-12 Bulletins Below: PPS has an updated health & safety plan; District leaders went before City Council about ‘educational emergency’ by TyLisa C. Johnson July 29, 2021 August 4, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Welcome to “By The Book: PGH K-12 Bulletins,” which provides updates on emerging and ever changing news in the Pittsburgh K-12 education landscape. With more than 40 school districts across Allegheny County, the Bulletins will update you on the region’s latest education news, including close coverage of the Pittsburgh Public Schools, other Allegheny County school districts, the Pennsylvania Department of Education and other important agencies, which serve thousands of Pittsburgh families. Please check back frequently and email tylisa@publicsource.org with questions, tips or Bulletin ideas. Follow along on Twitter with the hashtag #PGHed for news updates on Pittsburgh education. 7/29/21: Pittsburgh Public’s students will wear masks this fall Vaccinated or not, students and staff in Pittsburgh Public Schools will be required to mask up this fall. The Pittsburgh Public Schools Board of Education approved an updated district health and safety plan for the 2021-22 school year on Wednesday. The mask mandate aligns with updated CDC recommendations released Tuesday. District students return to in-person instruction at the end of August. Cleaning and filtering supplies were improved and upgraded. Students will still distance 3 feet from each other. For some, however, questions remain about the logistics of bringing back the district’s 20,000 students. Aside from the health and safety plan, the board also approved: Nearly $50 million in the second round of COVID aid The board accepted $49,541,438 in emergency relief, or ESSER II funds, from the state’s Department of Education to address indoor air quality, invest in technology and reliable wifi infrastructure and other district needs arising amid the COVID-19 pandemic. ESSER II funds can be spent from March 2020 through September 2023. Alice training, despite mild contention Three of the nine members voted against the training used to prepare for school shooting scenarios after voicing concern about the need and effectiveness of Alice training. Harbin raises concerns about ALICE training. ‘I don’t think this really is the best practice,” she says. Solicitor Ira Weiss refers to school code which says districts must offer training and drills on active shooter situations, though ALICE is not a statewide requirement — TyLisa C Johnson (@tylisawrites) July 28, 2021 Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Still, the board approved payments of $650 and $16,500 to the Alice Training Institute for ALICE recertification and certification training. TyLisa C. Johnson covers education for PublicSource. She can be reached at tylisa@publicsource.org or on Twitter at @tylisawrites . 7/29/21: Top 2 PPS leaders go before council members to address city’s ‘educational emergency’ For the first time on Wednesday, Pittsburgh Public’s Board President Sylvia Wilson and Superintendent Anthony Hamlet met with multiple Pittsburgh City Council members to discuss the district’s plans to improve academic achievement in the city’s public schools. Council members Daniel Lavelle and Rev. Ricky Burgess declared a state of emergency in Pittsburgh in February, citing the dueling challenges of COVID and persisting academic achievement gaps and underperformance. Lavelle and Burgess have hosted three meetings and two public hearings on the resolution so far, inviting guests from local education and advocacy organizations. In a brief presentation, Hamlet outlined district financial challenges, spending and plans. He said it will take collaboration with people from across industries and neighborhoods to ensure students have better academic outcomes in the city’s public schools. District charts are being presented on how district money is being spent and what financial needs need to be addressed. He also showed a chart to show the increase in Charter School spending pic.twitter.com/xzph7ZGaP6 — TyLisa C Johnson (@tylisawrites) July 28, 2021 Burgess and Lavelle wanted to know just how much students have been impacted academically by COVID, which led to students being out of school buildings and in virtual learning for a year. Lavelle asked if the district was able to monitor learning loss. (paraphrased) Lavelle: Were we able to track or monitor how much learning loss occurred over the last year? Hamlet: District hasn’t taken PSSA yet, which was a big measure in looking at children in math, reading and science. The district has plans to take PSSA’s in the fall. — TyLisa C Johnson (@tylisawrites) July 28, 2021 …I think we have to be honest that we have this lack of proficiency in multiple grade levels for African-Amerian and Black and Latino children citywide, probably countywide,” he continues. “Where do we think we’re at?” pic.twitter.com/gBey4gkL8f — TyLisa C Johnson (@tylisawrites) July 28, 2021 But the answer was murky. Dwyer is speaking now “There is not an easy answer… we do have assessments, the NWEA map assessment” which provides context on where students are at and where they’re going. He says they also look at grades, truancy, absences. “There’s no tried and true answer” — TyLisa C Johnson (@tylisawrites) July 28, 2021 See the full thread here: https://twitter.com/tylisawrites/status/1420439120694976516 TyLisa C. Johnson covers education for PublicSource. She can be reached at tylisa@publicsource.org or on Twitter at @tylisawrites . June recap: 06/30/21: New state budget funnels millions to public education 06/17/21: Staff shortages at PPS’ Summer BOOST, district may cut more than 1,000 students May recap: 5/25/21: Allegheny County names first director of Department of Children Initiatives 5/14/21: All students, five days a week this fall, district leaders say March recap: 3/24/21: By May 3 , all PPS students will return, district leaders say 3/19/21: No changes for PPS based on CDC guidance and more news on students’ return to schools January recap: 1/20/21: Another in-person instruction delay on the table for PPS 1/5/21: 5 takeaways from PPS’ first address of 2021 December recap: 12/16/20: Pittsburgh Public passes 2021 budget without a tax increase. Here are 3 key takeaways. 12/15/20: For the 2021 Pittsburgh Public budget, a property tax hike is on the table 12/11/20: Advocates call out a lack of state special ed funding in PA as costs skyrocket 12/10/20: Q&A: A chance to change – One PA advocate on what PPS should fund instead of school police in 2021 budget TyLisa C. Johnson covers education for PublicSource. She can be reached at tylisa@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: ALICE training , City Council , COVID , education , educational emergency , k-12 , k-12 education , masks in schools , Pittsburgh , pittsburgh public schools , Schools TyLisa C. Johnson tylisa@publicsource.org x TyLisa C. Johnson is the Audience Engagement Editor at PublicSource. She’s passionate about telling compelling human stories that intersect with complex issues affecting marginalized groups. Before joining... More by TyLisa C. Johnson