Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Wastewater spills increased during nation’s fracking boom by Natasha Khan September 9, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X 175 million gallons. That’s the amount of wastewater spilled from 2009 to 2014 from leading oil- and gas-producing states, according to a new Associated Press data analysis . The AP analysis excludes a key player, though. Although it’s the second-ranking gas producing state, Pennsylvania officials couldn’t provide comprehensive spill data to the news outlet. The 21,651 spills analyzed from 11 other states included burst pipes, storage tanks that overflowed and illegal dumping. The numbers are likely incomplete because many spills go unreported. Wastewater spills can be more damaging than oil spills, which often grab national headlines. And in seven of the 11 states the news outlet looked at the amount of wastewater spilled was double that of oil. Spilled oil, however unsightly, over time is absorbed by minerals in the soil or degraded by microbes. Not so with the wastewater, also known as brine, produced water or saltwater. Unless thoroughly cleansed, a costly and time-consuming process, salt-saturated land dries up. Trees die. Crops cannot take root. … In addition to the extreme salinity, the fluids often contain heavy metals such as arsenic and mercury, plus radioactivity. Even smaller discharges affecting an acre or two gradually add up for landowners — “death by a thousand bee stings,” said Don Shriber of Farmington, New Mexico, a cattleman who wrangled with an oil company over damage. The AP looked at data from Texas, North Dakota, California, Alaska, Colorado, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Wyoming, Kansas, Utah and Montana. Over the six-year period the amount of gallons spilled increased drastically as the fracking boom proliferated: In 2009, there were 2,470 reported spills in the 11 states; by 2014, the total was 4,643. The amount of wastewater spilled doubled from 21.1 million gallons in 2009 to 43 million in 2013 before dipping to 33.5 million last year. Texas, the leading oil- and gas-producing state in the nation, had the most spills at 4,783 and the most amount spilled, 62 million gallons. How these spills have affected land and water overall is unknown because state and federal regulators “make no such assessments,” according to the article . Pennsylvania has seen its fair share of spills and leaks from the gas industry throughout the fracking boom. Last year, Range Resources, one of the major gas drillers in the state, was levied a hefty $4.15 million fine by state environmental regulators for leaks and various issues with impoundments they used over the years to store wastewater. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan