Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts PublicSource is growing by swalsh July 6, 2013 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource is growing. We are extending our reach with new newspaper partners , including the Harrisburg Patriot-News , the Lancaster County Intelligencer Journal and New Era, The Erie Times-News and The York Daily Record . These new partners have hundreds of thousands of readers online and in print. With our latest story about labor violations at hotels in the state, partners were able to take our reporting and add more information for the readers in their areas. We also continue our collaborations with Pittsburgh partners, particularly with WESA.fm , our public radio partner. Public radio and public television stations across the country are joining forces with websites such as ours to provide more in-depth reporting. Events About 100 people attended a PublicSource and Pittsburgh Filmmakers event at the Harris Theater recently, where four experts talked about Internet security, government transparency and stealing secrets. There were so many questions and comments from the audience that we didn’t have time for all of them before we showed the film “We Steal Secrets: The Story of Wikileaks.” We’ll continue that discussion on the PublicSource Facebook page . Like us there and join in the conversation! We hope to have more of these events in the future. Watch for information about a series of special films coming up in September at the Regent Square Theater. We’ll be showing films about journalism the old-fashioned way — before the Internet. Recognition At a recent meeting of the Investigative News Network and Investigative Reporters and Editors, two PublicSource reporters were recognized for their work. Natasha Khan , our energy and environment reporter, was awarded a fellowship to attend the conference through a grant from the McCormick and the Ethics & Excellence in Journalism Foundations. At the same conference in San Antonio, transportation and infrastructure reporter Emily DeMarco was a featured panelist talking about using complaint data for in-depth investigations. DeMarco used 311 Response Call data from Pittsburgh to determine how long it took the city to fill potholes in different neighborhoods and found that residents were waiting longer to have complaints resolved. That, in turn, was contributing to the degradation to Pittsburgh’s 1,000 miles of streets. PublicSource will continue to pursue stories that inform and engage you. Contact us with story ideas, ask us questions on Facebook and donate if you’d like to see our nonprofit work continue. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI