Posted in Daily report , posts June 22, 2015 by Alexandra Kanik June 22, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Harrisburg: The lottery’s sordid past helps cement its pristine future If you’re a longtime Pennsylvania resident, you might remember the great lottery fix of 1980, called the “triple six fix”. Though this scandal cast doubt on the lottery at the time, it actually contributed to the present day security procedures in place today. Allentown: Transforming a downtown with private security Lehigh Valley Health Network, which employs and trains thousands in downtown Allentown, has invested in around-the-clock security guards , many unarmed, to ensure the safety of its crew. This might be a draw for those concerned about safety in city life. Erie: Turning evil to good Nearly 400 people marched down the streets of Erie last night in silence. The event, titled “All Lives Matter,” was organized after the tragic shootings in Charleston, S.C. Pittsburgh: We’re watching you If you’ve ever wondered at the benefits of using your Giant Eagle rewards card to save $0.15 on a bag of potato chips, maybe it’s because you weren’t the one getting the rewards. In addition to food savings and gas perks, rewards cards provide a plethora of information to companies about your buying habits. NATIONAL Not sure who you are? Facebook will tell you Facebook wants you to be yourself, share photos of your baby and express your political view. But recently the company has started cracking down on users who try and reserve some anonymity by suspending accounts when the user’s name doesn’t seem authentic. Facebook requires users to upload birth certificates, driver’s licenses and monthly bills in order to re-instate their profiles. This land is your land, this land is my land Mineral rights have long been a sticky issue, especially with the rise of shale gas drilling. How the land above is partitioned and how the land below is partitioned do not always line up. In West Virginia, shale gas companies have taken to suing land owners who refuse to sign over their partial mineral rights. Baltimore’s new approach to public health Baltimore has a new health commissioner with some interesting ideas on how to reform the city. But will it be enough? IN OTHER NEWS Human experiments The Nazis weren’t the only ones doing race experiments during WWII . The U.S. experimented on its own soldiers, and some of them are still alive to tell the tales. Clinton’s campaign logo deemed a winner Politics aside, Hillary Clinton’s campaign logo is a design winner. The daily report was compiled by Alexandra Kanik. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at akanik@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.