Posted in VIDEO Watch: Pittsburgh-area officials, environmentalists shared concerns and calls to action at climate change town hall by Anna Brewer September 17, 2019 September 17, 2019 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Joylette Portlock, executive director at Sustainable Pittsburgh. (Photo by Anna Brewer/PublicSource) This is part of Covering Climate Now, a global collaboration of more than 250 news outlets to strengthen coverage of the climate story. Read PublicSource’s stories here . On Aug. 14, 2019, U.S. Rep. Mike Doyle hosted a climate change forum at Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum. About 200 people attended to discuss how climate change stands to affect the Pittsburgh region and what can be done to avoid the most severe effects. At the time, PublicSource published a story on the forum, which you can read here . But we want to revisit that town hall in video form, so that, if you couldn’t make it, you can still observe the major takeaways. In this video, you’ll hear some of the concerns (ranging from the Beaver County ethane cracker plant to pediatric asthma, among others). You also will have the opportunity to listen to some area officials and environmentalists who called on the audience to not only make changes in their personal lives, but to also contribute to a change in mindset for how we talk about the environment and economy and what we prioritize to sustain human life into the future. ﻿ ﻿ ﻿ ﻿ Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram