Posted in Daily report , posts July 10, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 10, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Harrisburg: Why Wolf vetoed the pension plan Gov. Tom Wolf vetoed the bill on Thursday, accompanied with a letter. Wolf writes that the pension reform bill wouldn’t save taxpayers money or provide any long-term savings. He also said it violates federal tax law. Harrisburg: Cigarette smugglers Two New York men were stopped and arrested on I-81 on Thursday for attempting to smuggle more than 900 packs of unstamped, untaxed cigarettes. Both have been jailed and will have hearings in August. Pittsburgh: One of the 12 best places to invest The U.S. Department of Commerce chose the Pittsburgh region for the Investing in Manufacturing Communities Partnership , which entails receiving future federal grants from a $1 billion pool. Projections indicate that thousands of new metal manufacturing jobs will become available in the next 10 years. Philadelphia: Millennial voter turnout Millennials make up the largest population, but were the smallest turnout at the primaries. Only 12 percent of registered Millennials voted, compared to 38 percent of Baby Boomers. Statewide: 14 state-owned schools to increase tuition Pennsylvania’s state-owned universities will increase tuition by 3.5 percent this fall, raising base tuition to $7,060 per semester. This number doesn’t include fees imposed by the schools. NATIONAL Government hack affects 21 million The full extent of the cyber attack against the Office of Personnel Management was unveiled Thursday. According to OPM, the Social Security numbers of about 21.5 million Americans, most of whom applied for federal background checks since 2000, have been stolen. Lowering the flag On Thursday, South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley signed the law to remove the Confederate flag from the state capitol. It will come down at 10 a.m. today. Bumblebees and climate change An extensive study by the journal Science shows that climate change is pushing bumblebees toward extinction and that their survival may rely on human intervention. Bees are responsible for pollinating many crops, so if they drop significantly in number it could affect crop yields and food costs. WORLD The new middle class A new Pew Research Center study shows that the majority of the world lives on $2 to $4 a day. The study reveals that the global middle class is growing, but it’s still overshadowed by the extreme gap between rich and poor. IN OTHER NEWS A wedding dress for $46. Any takers? A federal drug bust in Alaska created a rather unusual situation. Normally, the kind of property seized from raids includes sports cars and speedboats, but this bust was made at a bridal store, meaning half-a-million dollars’ worth of gowns and tuxedos are being auctioned off to lucky brides and bidders. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.