Posted in HEALTH , On the beat , posts Hospices failing patients in crisis by Halle Stockton May 6, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Hospices throughout the nation are failing to fulfill promises of continuous end-of-life care to patients, a Washington Post investigation has found. The Post article begins with the story of Ying Tai Choi, an 85-year-old homebound hospice patient whose nurse left her side despite telling Choi’s daughter her mother was about to die. Choi died within the hour, without the comfort of “continuous care” to ease her breathing and pain, which the hospice had said it would provide. According to the article : For more than a million patients every year, the burgeoning U.S. hospice industry offers the possibility of a peaceful death, typically at home. But that promise depends upon patients getting the medical attention they need in a crisis, and hundreds of hospices provide very little care to such patients… The dismal glimpse into hospice care provided to patients near death was gleaned from Medicare billing records, internal reports and complaint records. The neglect is worse for patients in crisis. According to the article, one in six hospice agencies did not provide crisis care to any of its 50,000-plus patients in 2012. Some attribute it to the lack of inspections at hospices, which the article reports are “among the least inspected organizations in the U.S. health-care system, with most operating for years before an inspector calls.” The Post also includes an interactive map where readers can choose a state to see how many hospice facilities and patients there are and how many provide crisis care. More than 43,000 people are in hospice facilities in Pennsylvania, according to the map. The data also shows 12 out of 107 hospice facilities in the state do not provide crisis care. Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Care of children and elderly Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton