Posted in Daily report , posts July 22, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 22, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: President Obama spoke at VFW Convention Obama discussed last week’s shootings in Tennessee and the Iran nuclear deal. Pittsburgh: Police department understaffed The Pittsburgh Police department is struggling to recruit and train police officers. At his inauguration, Mayor Bill Peduto pledged to build up the department to at least 900 officers. Today, the bureau has 842, including 34 recruits in training. Pittsburgh: Prep for football season begins Later this week, the Steelers are making their way to Saint Vincent College in Latrobe for their 50th consecutive year of training camp . The regular season kicks off Sept. 10 . Robinson Township: Local pet store abused animals, says former employee Petland is under a social media-induced attack after a former employee claimed she had evidence of animal abuse. The photos went viral , prompting the store to close early Monday night. Petland has denied the accusations, and it isn’t the the first time they’ve faced such scrutiny over the health of their animals. Hellertown: Man charged with child endangerment An Eastern Pennsylvania man has been jailed on charges that he put prescription anti-anxiety medicine in his 2-year-old daughter’s cereal bowl. Police found the father passed out and the girl in her crib. Philadelphia: Tickets for papal visit crashes transportation website Gearing up for Pope Francis’ visit on Sept. 26, the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority temporarily suspended the sale of one-day regional passes due to technical problems. It plans to notify customers when sales will resume here . The city is also making arrangements for when nature calls . NATIONAL Senate begins planning bill for costly repairs The Senate is considering a multi-year bill for financing repairs to the nation’s highways and bridges. Good timing, too — the current program expires at the end of July and the state of American infrastructure received a D+ in its last report card . Ohio senator joins GOP presidential race Prominent Republican John R. Kasich announced his bid for the presidency on Tuesday, making him the party’s 16th candidate. In other GOP news, Donald Trump is leading in the polls. Confused about the race? Check out this cheat sheet . Controversial arrest and a jailhouse suicide The questionable arrest and subsequent suicide in a Texas jail cell continues to capture national attention. Sandra Bland was found hanged in cell on July 13. There are emerging reports about a dash cam video of her arrest and the independent autopsy her family requested. IN OTHER NEWS Dawn on ‘Dawn of the Dead’ finally comes A small footbridge from Romero’s 1978 filmed-in-Pittsburgh classic was a staple at the Monroeville Mall, but will find a new home today. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.