Posted in Daily report , posts June 16, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 16, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Manager of police personnel and finance fired Sandra Ganster has been on paid leave since the FBI started investigating former Pittsburgh Police Chief Nathan Harper two years ago, but she was fired last month for failing to report his criminal activities. Ganster is in the midst of appealing. Pittsburgh: Body of 2-year-old found in woods The toddler was reported missing Sunday night and found shortly thereafter. Police believe that her body was moved after death because she was too far away to have walked from her home. The investigation is ongoing. Harrisburg: Acting state police commissioner plans to resign Col. Marcus Brown has been in the position since January, but was rejected by the Senate last week. He will remain in the position until Gov. Tom Wolf finds a replacement. Harrisburg: Bills to allow hunting with semiautomatics Bills pending in the House propose to end the state ban on semiautomatic weapons for hunting. One bill allows only certain kinds of weapons to be used, while the second limits the use of semiautomatic rifles to only hunt foxes, coyotes and woodchucks. Philadelphia: Former police sergeant convicted On Monday, Thomas Winkis pleaded no contest to the charges of involuntary manslaughter and drunken driving, and was sentenced to two to seven years in prison. Winkis was driving 101 mph when he struck and killed a man in 2013. Statewide: Teacher evaluations A new rating system implemented to evaluate teachers was expected by many to lower the number of teachers deemed to be satisfactory. But the number actually went up to 98.2 percent for the 2013-14 school year, the highest in five years. NATIONAL NAACP chapter president steps down Rachel Dolezal , president of the Spokane chapter, resigned from her position on Monday after Dolezal’s mother produced her birth certificate and verified her European ancestry. On Friday, the Spokane police suspended their investigations into Dolezal’s racial-harassment complaints. Workers in Colorado can be fired for smoking marijuana A Supreme Court ruling was delivered on Monday that challenges the recreational legalization in the state. Businesses have the authority to fire employees if they test positive for use because, under federal law, marijuana is still illegal. Sharks dismember two teens in North Carolina Two separate shark attacks occurred on an Oak Island beach on Sunday. A teenage boy and girl both lost segments of their arms to the attacks. The beaches will remain open, although visitors are being told to swim with caution. A third Bush eyeing the White House After a lot of beating around the bush, Jeb finally declared the launch of his 2016 presidential campaign. He joins a very crowded pool as the 11th GOP contender . WEATHER Some Pennsylvania cities are still under threat of flooding and flash flooding , so watch out for more rain. IN OTHER NEWS Golf: More athletic than you think Even those who rent golf carts end up getting exercise — as much as a mile of walking, perhaps more. People who choose to walk the greens instead can cover about 5 miles and burn 2,000 calories doing so. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor ‘Jurassic World’ record The third “Jurassic Park” sequel set world box office records by bringing in more than $524 million this weekend, beating both “The Avengers” and “Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2.” The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI