Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 19, 2015 by Alexandra Kanik September 19, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: UPMC Presby starts mold investigation Officials are investigating to see whether the deaths of two ICU patients who underwent heart transplants are related to mold. Those deaths occurred in October and June. UPMC closed the unit Sept. 3 and relocated 18 patients after reporting that one had contracted a fungal infection. Pittsburgh: Public safety director leaves for state post Stephen A. Bucar, the city’s public safety director, is stepping down to take a position as deputy commissioner of staff with the Pennsylvania State Police. Bucar became director in May 2014 and his last day will be Oct. 9. Harrisburg: State senate passes spending plan amid stalemate A short-term spending plan of $11 billion dollars for the state was passed by the Senate, but will likely be vetoed by the governor. The budget situation has caused some schools to take out loans and other agencies to slice social services. Statewide: University union on way to halt background checks The Association of State College and University Faculties is one step closer to excusing faculty members from 14 state-owned universities from getting background checks after a judge’s decision. The union claims the checks are unfair labor practices. Harrisburg: Controversial bar stays open A judge ruled that the Third Street Café on North Third Street will remain open while it appeals a decision to revoke its business license. City officials claimed the bar, along with two others, was a hotspot for illegal activities. NATIONAL EPA accusations spark Volkswagen recall The car manufacturer has been ordered to recall nearly 500,000 vehicles after the Environmental Protection Agency accused it of cheating on emissions testing. It claims the company installed a “defeat device” to make the cars appear more eco-friendly than they are. Bill to block Planned Parenthood funding passes The House voted Friday not to fund Planned Parenthood for one year. It also approved a bill that would criminalize doctors if they don’t try to save infants born alive during abortions. The bills now must pass the Senate. New Orleans poor sue court for “scheming” Six plaintiffs filed a lawsuit against the New Orleans Criminal District Court, claiming it was scheming to keep poor people in jail if they missed court payments. One lawyer says funding the criminal justice system by fining the poor has increased over the years. Friend of Charleston shooter not guilty Joey Meek, who was friends with admitted shooter Dylann Roof, pleaded not guilty to lying to federal officials and to concealing his knowledge of Roof’s intentions. Authorities said Roof slept in the trailer where Meek lived with his two brothers, mother and girlfriend. Bergdahl testifies in desertion hearing Army Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl went to court Friday on charges that he deserted his post in Afghanistan in 2009. After leaving the post, Bergdahl was captured by the Taliban and held for five years before being exchanged for five Taliban commanders. WORLD Washington tries to mend relationship with Cuba U.S. companies will be allowed to set up offices in Cuba starting Monday, the Obama administration said. The move is designed to improve relations between the two countries by stimulating the economy and supporting political freedom. IN OTHER NEWS Microbeads, macro problems More than eight trillion plastic microbeads pollute the water each day, researchers said in a new study. Wildlife ingest the beads, which are commonly added to hygiene products such as toothpaste, because they are too small to be captured by filters. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.