Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts PA’s Right-to-Know law: Should it change for state-related schools? by WPTS January 26, 2012 November 17, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Jerry Sandusky scandal, natural-gas drilling on campus lands, research money from drilling companies, teacher cuts, spending. Would the public have known more about these issues if Pennsylvania’s Right-to-Know law extended to state-related universities, including the University of Pittsburgh and Penn State University? On Thursday, Jan. 26, The Pitt News on WPTS featured a conversation on the possible change in the law. State Rep. Jake Wheatley (D-Hill District) and PublicSource Editor Sharon Walsh talked with Mallory Grossman, news editor of the Pitt News. Click to hear the audio program. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. WPTS _migrated-111-wpts@example.com WPTS is the student radio station of the University of Pittsburgh More by WPTS