Posted in The Glimpse The Glimpse: Symphany Valencia creates a Día de los Muertos celebration in the South Side For Valencia, the Mexican holiday was a chance to bring culture and reflection. by Anastasia Busby November 4, 2024 December 3, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Symphany Valencia practices her first fire performance of the night, Friday, Nov. 1, 2024, at Burghers Brewery in South Side. (Photo by Anastasia Busby/PublicSource) Symphany Valencia laid out yellow and purple flowers, incense and candles to attract the spirits of her ancestors. Not only was the act a way to share the cultural tradition of Día de los Muertos in the South Side community, but it also served as a remembrance of an unborn child. Symphany Valencia decorates the table, Friday, Nov. 1, 2024, at Burghers Brewery in South Side. (Photo by Anastasia Busby/PublicSource) Friday marked the start of the Mexican holiday Día de los Muertos, the first day of which specifically honors children who have passed away. The day holds great meaning and reflection for Valencia, who chose to have an abortion two years ago. Natalie Gutierrez and her daughter Xiomara, 5, of Hazelwood paint mini canvases, Friday, Nov. 1, 2024, at Burghers Brewery in South Side. Gutierrez is Valencia’s cousin. (Photo by Anastasia Busby/PublicSource) “As someone who has had an abortion and wants to still honor that memory, still honor that energy, still give that recognition, because energy doesn’t disappear,” Valencia said.  “So why not create a happy, healing space?” Symphany Valencia performers her last fire performance of the night, Friday, Nov. 1, 2024, at Burghers Brewery in South Side. (Photo by Anastasia Busby/PublicSource) Valencia’s nonprofit, Spiritus Vitae, hopes to inspire healing and wellness through art, music, movement and nature. She hopes she can use her own abortion to connect with others and cultivate a space where people can mourn and reflect without feeling ashamed. Valencia named her unborn daughter Hope to symbolize the hope that she has for her future. “I wouldn’t have been able to do this if I’d had her,” she said. A framed ultrasound sits on a table, Friday, Nov. 1, 2024, at Burghers Brewery in South Side. Symphany Valencia also has a shrine at home where she honors her unborn child. (Photo by Anastasia Busby/PublicSource) Eric Hood, Valencia’s partner of four years, did the lighting and sound production at the event. He noted that he was there for Valencia as moral support during the abortion process. For Hood, the celebration is about “being reminded to have a positive outlook on it … to mourn and think about lost ones without feeling like they’re just completely gone.” Eric Hood listens to his headphones at the DJ board, Friday, Nov. 1, 2024, at Burghers Brewery in South Side. Hood did the sound and lighting for the event. (Photo by Anastasia Busby/PublicSource) Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Brie Ross and her husband Bruno Vizcarra order drinks, Friday, Nov. 1, 2024, at Burghers Brewery in South Side. Ross and Vizcarra were glad to find an event on the first day of Día de los Muertos. (Photo by Anastasia Busby/PublicSource) Valencia’s event was hosted in partnership with Burghers Brewing’s South Side location. Music filled the chilly November air as people mingled over an art table, photo booth and the oferenda. An oferenda (offering table) is a typical part of Día de los Muertos. The courtyard aesthetic reminded Valencia of celebrations with her family in San Salvador. “In my culture, we don’t fear death, and instead, we just look at it as a beautiful next step,” Valencia said. “And we hold the memory of those who have passed through their photos, through their food, through the talking of them, and we know that they’re with us.” Brittni Jones, the manager at Burghers Brewing South Side location, said she loves that she has the ability to host events like Valencia’s. “I feel that whenever Burghers works with nonprofits, it’s good to bring awareness to their causes,” Jones said, “as well as bring us business at the same time.” Anastasia Busby is a photojournalist with PublicSource who can be reached at anastasia@publicsource.org and on Instagram @abuzzbee_photography . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: abortion , diadelosmuertos , leadstorynoshow