Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Fracking is becoming a big deal in the Democratic senate race by Reid Frazier April 13, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X It’s fueled a drilling boom in the U.S. Now, fracking is becoming fodder on the campaign trail. The three leading Democratic candidates for the U.S. Senate seat currently held by Republican Pat Toomey have been sparring over the past few weeks over environmental issues—particularly fracking. Former Congressman and Navy Rear Admiral Joe Sestak and Braddock Mayor John Fetterman have both called for a moratorium on fracking until regulations are tightened. Katie McGinty, former chief of staff for Governor Tom Wolf, does not support a moratorium. “I’m for a moratorium on fracking,” Sestak told WPSU’s public affairs program Take Note recently. “How can you ever do something where the [Auditor] General has said our Department of [Environmental] Protection (DEP) wasn’t prepared to oversee the drilling?” Sestak was referring to a 2014 Pennsylvania Auditor General’s report that found the DEP provided inconsistent and inadequate oversight over the fracking industry. McGinty has become a target because she headed the DEP in the early days of Pennsylvania’s gas boom. She accused Sestak of flip-flopping on fracking at a televised debate among the three candidates in Pittsburgh hosted by WTAE-TV. “Congressman Sestak, in his book, calls fracking the common good—waves regulators off to not step on that rustic spirit and pioneering spirit of our energy developers,” McGinty said. Listen to this Allegheny Front story: Though Sestak called for a moratorium as far back as 2010 , his 2015 book Walking in Your Shoes makes no mention of it. The book praises the potential positive impacts of fracking, like lowering carbon emissions and limiting foreign oil imports. But he writes “it must not be done at a greater cost, or even damage, to our Commonwealth.” At the debate, Sestak and Fetterman attacked McGinty’s record on fracking as former DEP secretary under Governor Ed Rendell. “Ms. McGinty, along with Governor Rendell, brought fracking to Pennsylvania,” Fetterman said. Fetterman sparred with McGinty at the debate over donations from the oil and gas industry. “Own your donors,” Fetterman said. “I never understand why Ms. McGinty wants to run away from her history in fracking. Embrace what you’ve done—embrace these things that you’ve done in your career.” Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting McGinty says she is in favor of stringent regulations on fracking, but not a moratorium. She likes to highlight her long resume on environmental issues—including being an adviser to Senator Al Gore and serving as head of the White House Council on Environmental Quality during the Clinton Administration. “I’ve dedicated my professional career to protecting the environment and also shattering the myth that if you’re for jobs, you’re against the environment—and if you’re against the environment, you’re against jobs,” she said at the debate. She also touted her record of promoting clean energy, both at the DEP and later in the private sector. She also pointed to endorsements from groups like the League of Conservation Voters . “The bottom line is I’m supported by the solar industry, the wind industry—I’m not supported by the frackers,” she said. But opponents, including many Republicans, have criticized McGinty’s involvement with private energy companies after she left the DEP. She was a board member for NRG and Iberdrola—energy companies with natural gas and wind investments—after leaving DEP in 2008. At the debate, McGinty said her private sector work gave her real-world experience that her opponents don’t have. “It’s important in a job as important as these jobs are that you have real-world experience,” she said. “And I’m proud I’m not just a creature of government.” Voters will have their chance to weigh-in on the candidates arguments soon enough. The Democratic primary in Pennsylvania is April 26. The story is provided by PublicSource content partner The Allegheny Front, an environmental radio program based in Pittsburgh. Reach reporter Reid Frazier at Reid.Frazier@verizon.net. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy