Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan July 31, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been at least six train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Casey wants $1 million for more rail inspectors There’s currently only one Federal Railroad Administration inspector to oversee 919 train bridges in Pennsylvania and a severe shortage of these inspectors nationwide, U.S. Sen. Bob Casey, D-Pa., told reporters on a press call this week. Worried about crude oil train traffic on these bridges breaking down infrastructure, Casey has asked the federal government to spend $1 million to help hire more inspectors, according to the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. U.S. issues new brake rules for oil trains More than two years after a runaway train in Lac-Megantic plowed into the small Quebec town, killing 47 people, the Federal Railroad Administration is now requiring that two qualified railroad workers must set handbrakes and do other safety checks on equipment for trains carrying hazardous products, including crude oil, with more than 20 cars left unattended, according to Al Jazeera America . Fire chief travels across the country teaching citizens how to prepare for crude oil train disasters In the event of a large-scale oil train disaster, would you know what to do? John Malool, an occupational safety professor at Rutgers University and fire chief of Ridgefield Park, N.Y., is helping people who live in cities with heavy crude oil traffic prepare for potential accidents, according to KPLU News. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Eighty-six-year-old N.J. railroad bridge with heavy crude oil traffic to get upgrades A deteriorating wooden New Jersey bridge is pegged for upgrades after months of outcry from local residents worried about increased traffic of trains carrying Bakken crude, according to NorthJersey.com . Senate panel passes bill to lift 40-year U.S. ban on crude oil exports A Senate panel approved legislation this week that would lift the ban on crude oil exports, which could increase crude oil train traffic, according to The Associated Press . Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan