Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 1, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 1, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Another hospital had mold problems Two patients at Allegheny General Hospital contracted fungal infections in 2014 after transplants, health officials said. One died. The ongoing probe at UPMC Presbyterian and Montefiore prompted the announcement. Pittsburgh: Student charged for bringing suspected heroin to school An 18-year-old student is suspended from University Prep in Hill District after authorities suspected him of bringing 13 stamp bags of heroin to the school. He will be charged with a misdemeanor for possession. Western PA: Leaders launch transportation initiative Members from the public and private sectors will collaborate on a Regional Transportation Alliance . The group will hear from more than 700 community organizations on their transportation needs and determine long-term projects. Harrisburg: High standards, low test scores This year’s math and reading scores for grades three through eight are 21 percent lower than last year’s. The state Department of Education says the scores dropped because the tests are not the same as the ones distributed in past years. Washington, D.C.: Pennsylvania Republicans for McCarthy Eleven of the state’s 13 GOP representatives support Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy of California as House speaker. Current Speaker John Boehner will leave his post Oct. 30. NATIONAL Government skirts shutdown The Senate passed a spending bill to sustain federal funding until Dec. 11. The House and President Obama approved the bill before the deadline at midnight. Follow-up with Pope Francis Pope Francis met with Kentucky clerk Kim Davis during his U.S. visit last week, the Vatican confirmed. Francis also voiced his opposition to the nation’s death penalty in his congressional address, but several states have scheduled executions despite his remarks. Oakland Athletics appoints first female MLB coach Justine Siegal, 40, will be the first woman to coach in the baseball league. The NHL is the only sports league that hasn’t had a female coach. WORLD HIV guidelines revised Doctors should treat HIV patients as early as possible instead of waiting for them to show signs of illness, the World Health Organization reports. The U.S. and other developed countries already comply to this standard. Bombings in China Seven people are dead and 51 injured after explosions rocked a city in southern China. The Ministry of Public Security says the bombings, which hit several public places and government buildings, are criminal rather than terrorist acts. IN OTHER NEWS Gold at the end of the tunnel Explorers may have found a legendary “ gold train ” in Poland. Supposedly, the Nazis hid in a secret city by the site, but had to leave the train behind when the Soviet Army drove them out near the end of World War II. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI