Posted in DEVELOP PGH Updated: Mon Valley libraries get $3.8 million for ‘transformative’ changes The Regional Asset District board voted to move $5 million from reserves to a new fund that could be a carrot for cooperation between libraries. by Kate Giammarise and Rich Lord May 18, 2023 May 19, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Braddock Library Director Rachel Brehm sits in the office in the back of the cramped storefront space that is serving the community while the 134-year-old permanent facility is renovated. (Photo by Quinn Glabicki/PublicSource) Update (5/18/23): The Allegheny Regional Asset District will grant $3.8 million to five Mon Valley libraries. The RAD board voted to steer its first-ever Transformative Community Library Fund grants to: Braddock Carnegie Library ($1.25 million) for exterior and vestibule repairs and reconstruction Carnegie Free Library of Swissvale ($800,000) for accessibility renovations Carnegie Library of McKeesport ($750,000) to create public space for community groups Clairton Public Library ($500,000) to help move the library to a new space Carnegie Library of Homestead ($500,000) to make the building more accessible and increase programming space. The fund, meant to address the needs of libraries serving low-income communities, has a $5 million outlay and further grants are likely, according to RAD. WESA and PublicSource reported last year on the gulf in funding and needs of the dozens of separate library systems in Allegheny County. Reported 6/2/22: The Allegheny Regional Asset District will push millions in additional funding toward libraries serving the county’s most impoverished areas, the agency’s board announced Thursday. A new $5 million Transformative Community Library Fund , to be spent over four years, will help libraries that serve distressed areas to plan improvements, amid a push for more effective collaborations to reduce administrative burdens. “The communities that most need libraries may have less access to them,” said RAD board Secretary/Treasurer Sylvia Fields. She added that short staffing often hamstrings libraries’ community service. “Library directors and their staff are oftentimes consumed by administrative duties.” RAD is a major funder of Allegheny County’s 46 separate library systems — the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh and 45 suburban systems — which have disparate levels of funding, physical spaces, staffing and programming. The Clairton Public Library plans to move into a new space that is under construction. (Photo by Kaycee Orwig/PublicSource) The Allegheny County Library Association characterizes 16 of the county’s suburban libraries as serving distressed communities, based on poverty rates. Fields called RAD’s commitment an “unprecedented investment” shortly before the board at its quarterly meeting voted to amend the 2022 budget to draw $5 million from reserves for the new fund. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The money need not be shared evenly across the four-year period. It can be distributed rapidly or slowly, depending on the applications received. RAD staff will work with the libraries to craft their plans and applications. Read more: Allegheny County’s 46 library systems face uneven funding and pressure to change WESA and PublicSource reported last month on the disparate finances and needs of the dozens of separate library systems in Allegheny County. Among the findings: 10% of the funding flowing from the RAD tax to suburban libraries is distributed based on poverty rates, with the rest allocated based on factors including local contributions, circulation and use of computers and wi-fi. More than three times as much RAD money flows to the 19-branch CLP than to all 45 suburban libraries combined. CLP has offered to share some of its expertise with suburban libraries, but acceptance of those offers has been uneven, and collaboration currently isn’t mandatory Officials believe funding concerns will eventually force more shared services, though wholesale mergers appear unlikely in the near future. State funding to libraries has been flat for more than a decade and runs less than one-sixth of what Ohio gives to its libraries. RAD has been pushing smaller libraries to cooperate more on back-office functions, either with the 19-branch CLP or through ACLA. Fields said RAD will “look forward to having all libraries enroll in these programs.” “It’s something that’s really, really important to us to bring our libraries in distressed communities to a higher level of service to their communities,” said Dusty Elias Kirk, the RAD board chair, at the board meeting. Rich Lord is PublicSource’s economic development reporter, and can be reached at rich@publicsource.org or on Twitter @richelord . Kate Giammarise is a reporter for WESA focusing on poverty, social services and affordable housing, and can be reached at kgiammarise@wesa.fm or 412-697-2953. 90.5 WESA’s parent organization, Pittsburgh Community Broadcasting, is among the organizations that receive RAD funding . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , leadstorynoshow Kate Giammarise _migrated-1102885-kate-giammarise@example.com Kate Giammarise is a reporter covering the impact of COVID-19 on the economy for WESA, and can be reached at kgiammarise@wesa.fm or 412-697-2953. More by Kate Giammarise Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord