Posted in Economy & Housing Will Downtown become Pittsburgh’s next hot neighborhood? Three projects would reimagine Market Square, Point State Park and Fort Duquesne Boulevard in bids to make Downtown a walkable, livable hotspot. by Roman Hladio June 12, 2024 June 12, 2024 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Artist's rendering of Market Square and the Golden Triangle area following proposed revitalization efforts. (Illustration courtesy of the Allegheny Conference) This story was originally published by NEXTpittsburgh , a news partner of PublicSource. NEXTpittsburgh features the people, projects and places advancing the region and the innovative and cool things happening here. Sign up to get their free newsletter. Local leaders want to make Downtown Pittsburgh its own walkable neighborhood, chock full of sports courts and green spaces. Three proposed revitalization projects would see that goal reached in the next two years. The Allegheny Conference on Community Development envisions Pittsburgh’s longtime business district becoming a place to work, live and play — somewhere “people want to be, not where they have to be,” said CEO Stefani Pashman. The proposed developments would remove automobile access to Market Square, equip Point State Park and the wide medians on Liberty Avenue with exercise facilities, and create a pedestrian entertainment destination where 8th Street and the 10th Street Bypass meet along Fort Duquesne Boulevard. From left: Allegheny County Executive Sara Innamorato, Allegheny Conference CEO Stefani Pashman and Pittsburgh Mayor Ed Gainey speak with members of the press about new Downtown revitalization projects off Penn Avenue and 8th Street. (Photo by Roman Hladio) Although plans aren’t finalized, preliminary renderings show pickleball and basketball courts connecting Market Square and Point State Park and bench swings and water features between the Rachel Carson and Andy Warhol bridges. Field Operations, a New York-based design company that is responsible for Manhattan’s High Line and Chicago’s Navy Pier, is a consultant on the project. Pashman led a press tour through all three proposed sites with Allegheny County Executive Sara Innamorato and Pittsburgh Mayor Ed Gainey on June 5. Pashman said the project has 45 community partner organizations. The state of Pennsylvania is also a partner, especially within the context of the Conference’s vision for Point State Park. Conceptualization of Point State Park after the Allegheny Conference’s proposed revitalization project’s completion. (Illustration courtesy of the Allegheny Conference) “The state is excited to partner with us and already has ideas about how they want to see this move,” Pashman said. So far, local businesses — like those in Market Square — have had little involvement, save some being privy to the preliminary designs. Pashman said their participation will increase as the Conference begins its public engagement process this summer. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting During the press event, Pashman repeated that the project is still in its “vision stage.” She said the project will take about two years, but was hesitant to put a price tag on it. Other details like traffic flow, road closures affecting nearby parking garages and unhoused populations in the affected areas were not determined. “Today we’re going to talk about the ‘What’ and we’ll get to the ‘How’ later,” Pashman said. “The facts are we have a real partnership built with a variety of entities from the business community to the public sector, at the state level, at the local level … and we’re all going to come together and deliver on this vision that we’ve achieved together.” The projects come as Downtown contends with decreasing demand for office rentals and increasing desire for residential space. A May 30 story from IndexPGH — a city data dashboard managed by the Allegheny Conference — noted that two upcoming developments would spend $54 million to bring 108 new residential units to Downtown. In December 2023, the May Building and GNC’s former headquarters separately received funds that, when combined, totaled $11 million to create nearly 350 more residential units. Conceptualization for Market Square. (Illustration courtesy of the Allegheny Conference) “We know that housing is a demand Downtown,” Gainey said. “The reality is about creating the right formula to ensure that we can do the conversion that’s necessary to make Downtown a neighborhood.” Pittsburgh is expected to receive visitors from across the nation when the NFL draft comes to the city in 2026. Pashman said the timing was not planned — that this project has been in the works for a year and a half already — but that key partners are “very well aware of how this could showcase the city.” Innamorato added that the redevelopment is meant for the people of Pittsburgh. “It’s going to be great as we sell the region to new businesses, new tourists, and we can definitely use it as an economic driver,” Innamorato said, “but it is an investment in the people, businesses, arts and organizations that are here.” Roman Hladio is a reporter for NEXTpittsburgh . He wants to hear the stories created in Pittsburgh. When not reporting, he plays difficult video games that make him upset and attempts to make delicious meals out of mismatched leftovers. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Downtown , Golden Triangle , housing , leadstorynoshow , market square , Pittsburgh , redevelopment