Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan September 11, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Railroads threaten to suspend service If Congress does not extend a Dec. 31 deadline for railroads to implement positive train control — a safety feature that could have prevented the Amtrak derailment in Philadelphia — major railroads have said they may suspend services for both freight and passenger rail lines, according to Reuters . Maryland releases crude oil routing information After countless public records request and a lawsuit from the rail industry, Maryland state officials on Wednesday released information to the public on the number of trains and routes on which crude oil is transported, according to The Baltimore Sun . California implements new rail safety law The new state law requires trains carrying freight cargo, including crude oil, to be operated by two people, according to the Vallejo Times-Herald . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Environmental group says oil trains bypass thousands of U.S. schools The group’s analysis found nearly 15,000 U.S. schools with 5.7 million students are within one mile of tracks that haul toxic substances, including crude oil, according to Reuters . Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan