Posted in COVID-19 Community Callout: Your COVID life in Pittsburgh, two years later by TyLisa C. Johnson and Jourdan Hicks February 3, 2022 September 7, 2022 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X From rush hour traffic and working in cubicles to double-masking and triple-vaxxing, our lives are worlds away from where we were in February 2020. The reality is, many of our lives have been changed forever. Here in Allegheny County, some renters are on shaky ground, COVID cases are dropping after a record-breaking spike and schools are grappling with how to educate students. Recent COVID surges have led to shortages at critical institutions. As we near two full years in a pandemic environment, PublicSource wants to hear from you. Please share your thoughts. Note that we won’t publish anything from you without contacting you for permission, so please share your email! Please fill out our form below to let us know: Loading… Loading… Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Allegheny County , COVID vaccines , COVID-19 , Criminal Justice , mask , pandemic , Pennsylvania , Pgh , Pittsburgh TyLisa C. Johnson tylisa@publicsource.org x TyLisa C. Johnson is the Audience Engagement Editor at PublicSource. She’s passionate about telling compelling human stories that intersect with complex issues affecting marginalized groups. Before joining... More by TyLisa C. Johnson Jourdan Hicks jourdan@publicsource.org instagram Jourdan is a senior community correspondent at PublicSource. Previously, Jourdan was engaged as a community-based educator in the Hazelwood section of the city. A lifelong Pittsburgh resident, she’s... More by Jourdan Hicks