Posted in Daily report , posts August 20, 2015 by PublicSource contributor August 20, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: $10,000 in tools stolen from environmental nonprofit Tree Pittsburgh reported that $10,000 in cultivators, water pumps, wagons, hand tools, a generator and a weed trimmer was taken from their nursery in Upper Lawrenceville. No trees were damaged, and other organizations have offered to loan tools to the nonprofit. Pittsburgh: Building organization follows through with suit The Building Owners and Managers Association of Pittsburgh has filed suit against the city and its right to impose requirements on private businesses. The suit challenges a relatively new law requiring security guards, janitors and maintenance workers to complete a Fire Bureau-certified training class. Pittsburgh: City landmark for sale? One Oxford Centre, the 45-story glass-and-aluminum tower in downtown Pittsburgh, could be on the market soon. Oxford Development Corp. is considering selling the building, saying there is a high demand for real estate in that area. Harrisburg: Lawmakers talk school aid Republican lawmakers are willing to agree to Gov. Tom Wolf’s plan to improve public school aid if he discontinues pension benefits for state government and public school employees in the future. Wolf is considering the offer’s conditions. Philadelphia: Congressman pleads not guilty to corruption charges Rep. Chaka Fattah claims he did not use off-limits grant money to pay for a portion of his son’s student debt. After appearing in court, he said he is interested in running for re-election next year. Philadelphia: Convict won’t go back to jail, appeals court rules Han Tak Lee, who was charged last year for his daughter’s death by fire in 1989, will remain free after an appeals court decided not to renew his murder conviction. Prosecutors claimed that Lee set fire to the cabin that his mentally ill daughter was staying in during a religious retreat, but the conviction was based on outdated science. Adams County: Man charged with homicide, 35 years later Officials charged 54-year-old Abraham Cruz Jr. with homicide, conspiracy, arson and burglary in the alleged murder of a mother and her daughter in 1980 . Cruz was also sentenced in another case of threatening a Social Security Office in 2011. NATIONAL Ex-Subway spokesman pleads guilty to child porn charges Jared Fogle, a former spokesman for the chain restaurant, accepted a plea deal on Wednesday. He could get five to 12 years in prison on charges involving sex with minors and child pornography. Zimbabwean farmer charged, but Palmer goes free for lion hunt The farmer who allegedly allowed the American dentist to hunt on his land, and ultimately kill Cecil the lion, faces either one year in prison or a $400 fine. Meanwhile, Walter Palmer’s Minneapolis practice has reopened without him. Stolen data from cheating site now public Impact Team, who hacked the cheating website Ashley Madison last month, allegedly published the credit card details, addresses, phone numbers and names of users. It also set up a database that allows people to search for users. Clinton stirs controversy with “Black Lives Matter” Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton met with members of the activist group and recommended they focus on policy changes rather than their current mission of “changing hearts.” Clinton claims she was encouraging the group to adopt a solid approach, but one activist says she’s “victim blaming.” IN OTHER NEWS The cheesiest crime A crime ring selling…cheese…was raided by officials in Russia. Last year, the government prohibited trading dairy products with the United States and some members of the European Union over controversy involving Ukraine. The raids were a federal attempt at enforcing the ban. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.