Posted in Daily report , posts Sept. 23, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 23, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Airport loses another non-stop flight Delta Air Lines will lose its non-stop flight to Cincinnati on Oct. 1. It currently flies into Pittsburgh six times a week. Allyson Walls, the spokeswoman for the Allegheny County Airport Authority, said there weren’t enough pilots to continue the flight. Pittsburgh: Peduto proposes major budget increase for 2016 Mayor Bill Peduto proposed a $517.5 million operating budget, which will not include a real estate tax increase. Peduto plans to set aside $70.2 million for capital spending projects such as street paving, building reconstruction, community development projects and the demolition of neglected buildings. Pittsburgh: Developers for former Civic Arena site set to hear from community The Bjarke Ingles Group (BIG) will lead a workshop Monday to hear from the stakeholders and residents of the Hill District about the proposed development of the former Civic Arena site. BIG was hired by the Pittsburgh Penguins and McCormack Baron Salazar to lead the design of 1,100 new units of residential housing. Philadelphia: Medics ready for Pope’s visit A tent will be set up this weekend for medical staff to assist anyone with problems during the events surrounding Pope Francis’ visit. The city has planned carefully around the type of crowd, acknowledging that many visitors will have previous medical issues and come to seek healing from the pope. Harrisburg: Kane’s suspension enforced Oct. 21 Attorney General Kathleen Kane’s law license was suspended Monday , but she can continue to practice law until Oct. 21. The Pennsylvania Rules of Disciplinary Enforcement states that a 30-day notice is required before the suspension can take effect. NATIONAL The Pope arrives President Obama and Vice President Joe Biden both welcomed Pope Francis to Washington for the leader’s first visit to the U.S. Pope Francis will be here for the next five days, traveling from Washington to New York before ending his trip in Philadelphia . Labor and capital inequality by gender The typical male worker hasn’t had a raise since the early 1970s . Male earnings plateaued despite gains in the economy because of the inequality between workers and owners as well as increasing between workers themselves. It just hasn’t been noticeable in households because women have been covering for men in the labor force. Clinton against Keystone pipeline At a town hall meeting in Iowa, Hillary Clinton came out against the proposed 1,200 mile Keystone XL pipeline that would connect Alberta, Canada, with Nebraska. The project is under review by the State Department, and Clinton believes it to be a distraction from “important work … on climate change .” IN OTHER NEWS Text reminders help with heart disease In a random clinical trial, 700 participants with coronary heart disease were split into groups that received semi-personalized text messages about healthy topics (like “Have you taken your walk today?” or “It’s important to take your medications at the same time every day”). Those who received the texts reduced their blood pressure, cholesterol and body mass index. The daily report was compiled by Christine Manganas and Stephanie Roman, PublicSource interns. You can reach them with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org and sroman@publicsource.org . Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI