Posted in Education Remake Learning Days Festival brings 220+ hands-on learning events to Pittsburgh area The events give kids and their grownups a chance to learn together, exploring art, science, technology, outdoor learning, maker projects and ideas that elevate youth voice. by Melissa Rayworth, Kidsburgh May 3, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Remake Learning Days activities (Photo courtesy of Ben Filio/Remake Learning Days) Three weeks of fun and learning are coming to Southwestern Pennsylvania after the Remake Learning Days festival kicked off on May 1. Running through May 23, this year’s festival includes more than 220 hands-on learning events happening all over the region, nearly all of them free, at local libraries, schools, tech centers, parks, museums, play spaces, community centers and more. These events give kids and their grownups a chance to learn together, exploring art, science, technology, outdoor learning, maker projects and ideas that elevate youth voice, all while having fun as a family. “It’s one of my favorite times of year, because families with kids of all ages can go out and explore their communities,” says Remake Learning Days Co-Producer Yu-Ling Cheng. “You never know what new passion you might discover for your child at one of these events.” For families that have been considering an afterschool program or enrichment classes for their child, the festival is a perfect opportunity to experience something new for free. “If there’s something that you’ve been thinking about trying but you’ve been hesitant to commit to it, Remake Learning Days lets you try it. You can see how it feels for your child and your family,” Cheng says. “If you like what you experience, then you can find even more resources like that.” The festival, which began in the Pittsburgh area, has now become a global celebration of learning, with events happening nationwide — and as far away as Uruguay, the United Kingdom and New Zealand. “This is our 10th anniversary, which seems incredible. We started in 2016 and it was just a little idea,” Cheng says. “What we’ve learned over the 10 years is that each year family-engaged learning is becoming even more important to families. Family-engaged learning is also a way to help extend the school day and help kids to learn in ways that feel relevant to them.” People participate in Remake Learning Days activities. (Photo courtesy of Ben Filio/Remake Learning Days) Finding events for the family Though there are hundreds of events to choose from (including some happening virtually), it’s easy to find the ones that are right for your family. You can visit remakelearningdays.org , then choose Southwestern Pennsylvania under “Find Your Region.” Or you can go directly to the events dashboard for the region by clicking here . You can scroll through all the events or search for events by date or theme. Science-loving families won’t want to miss the Discover Scuba events happening at the Kingsley Center on May 7, in Penn Hills on May 17 and in Deer Lakes on May 18. Kids will get a chance to explore marine science and STEM careers like oceanography and underwater robotics with help from the Curious Minds Dive Foundation. LEGO-loving families can also have fun on May 6, when Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh hosts Kids Club — LEGO Building Challenge . Families can also get creative at Riverview High School’s Wear Your Creativity: Fashion for All Abilities event or get their hands dirty during a Terrarium Takeover happening at Plum Borough Community Library, both taking place on May 7. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Explore here to find hundreds of additional events. People participate in Remake Learning Days activities (Photo by Ben Filio/Remake Learning Days) The power of learning together Attending Remake Learning Days events helps families to discover local learning resources in the community. But these events also help kids get inspired alongside their parents and caregivers, and that can have a positive impact that ripples out for years to come. Research has shown that learning together as a family has real benefits. After surveying hundreds of attendees at past Remake Learning Days events in the Pittsburgh region, the Global Family Research Project found that family engagement in STEAM learning makes students more likely to succeed academically, more likely to take advanced STEAM courses, and more likely to pursue STEAM-related careers. There are hundreds of events happening throughout the region, so it’s easy to find some that appeals to every member of your family. Melissa Rayworth is the executive editor of Kidsburgh. She has spent two decades writing about families, parenting, culture and design for global and regional magazines and news outlets. She can be reached at mrayworth@gmail.com . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: leadstorynoshow