Posted in DEVELOP PGH Newsroom note: What to expect from our new reporting initiative on economic development in the Pittsburgh region by PublicSource archive March 4, 2019 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource is thrilled to announce the debut of Develop PGH — a focused reporting project with a goal to provide vital information, transparency and accountability about the design, planning and development of the Pittsburgh region. Our weekly coverage will track the ins and outs of economic development and how it’s shaping communities. Who is this for? Develop PGH is in-depth enough for developers and government officials, but accessible to everyone invested in the long-term prosperity of our city and region. We’ll aim to always illuminate the issues from all perspectives, from developers to activists and government officials to residents. We are planning coverage that we expect will create a community primed for fair and open discussions. What can you expect? While in-depth coverage remains a hallmark of the PublicSource experience, we’ll be doing things a bit differently for Develop PGH. You’ll still see deeply reported stories (and we have some exciting ones to share soon), but you’ll also see more regular, incremental reporting each week. This way, you’ll know the latest about changes and decisions that may affect you and what you do next. We hired reporter Tom Lisi to focus entirely on producing Develop PGH stories. And we promoted longtime public safety reporter Jeffrey Benzing to assistant editor to focus on this coverage. The team will be demystifying the process and policies related to economic development issues and talking with the key players, institutions and communities that guide change. PublicSource’s Develop PGH team: assistant editor Jeff Benzing (left) and reporter Tom Lisi. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) In this vein of reporting, we will continue our coverage of the affordable housing shortage and transportation infrastructure, among other related issues. Our focus areas will be within the City of Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. You’ll see our stories here on PublicSource.org and in a new newsletter featuring our original reporting and a weekly rundown of everything you need to know on economic development. Sign up here. We also want to hear from you — really! Development isn’t just bricks and mortar. It’s not just policy. It’s how a community works and affects who gets to participate in the process. We are a resource for you, and we see our new endeavor as an invitation to a conversation. If you have story tips and ideas, people or groups we should know about, or a perspective to share in an essay or some other creative means, send them to tom@publicsource.org or to jeff@publicsource.org . Thank you for learning more about Develop PGH, We hope you’ll check back regularly for the exciting stories we have in the pipeline. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The project is made possible with the generous support from The Heinz Endowments. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI