Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts There was some big fracking news this week so we rounded it up by Natasha Khan May 25, 2016 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X This was by far the most written about story on the frack beat this week Every news outlet and their mom wrote about the resignation of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection [DEP] Secretary John Quigley and his curse-filled email urging environmentalists to stand up to state legislators over proposed oil and gas rules. StateImpact PA got a copy of the now infamous email . More on how Hillary Clinton sold fracking to the world Reporters at The Intercept have uncovered emails documenting how Clinton and her old posse at the U.S. Department of State exported American-style fracking to countries around the world. You may not have heard about… A new study that shows children and infants are particularly at risk for health problems from air pollution emitted by shale gas operations. Spotlight actor Mark Ruffalo tussles with Gov. Wolf Curly-haired and avid anti-fractivist Ruffalo sent the Pennsylvania governor a letter begging him to help families in Pennsylvania who are experiencing health problems around fracking activities. DEP drops $9 million fine against major fracking company Regulators said the company leaked methane into drinking water supplies and streams but withdrew the hefty fine after reaching an agreement with Range Resources, reports The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette’s Laura Legere. A federal public health report shows impact of Dimock’s water contamination The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry under the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has found chemicals in some private water wells in Dimock, Pa., were at high enough levels to affect health, pose a physical hazard or affect general water quality. They based their conclusions on Environmental Protection Agency water samples taken in 2012. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Town residents became the face of the anti-fracking movement when director Josh Fox portrayed their water struggles in the film Gasland. Dimock’s water woes date back to 2008 when Cabot Oil and Gas started drilling in the Susquehanna County town. The next year the DEP found that the company contaminated water wells there with methane. Earlier this year, a federal jury ordered Cabot to pay two Dimock families $4.24 million for polluting their water. Reach Natasha Khan at 412=315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan