Posted in Education New board members lay out their visions as PPS prepares for closures and budget cuts New PPS directors for districts 4,6 and 8 want to prioritize equitable resources and transparency. by Lajja Mistry November 7, 2023 November 8, 2023 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pittsburgh Public Schools board candidates, from left to right, Dwayne Barker, Yael Silk and Emma Yourd. (Photos courtesy of candidates and LinkedIn) Three new members say they hope to bring fresh perspectives to the Pittsburgh Public Schools board as it prepares for budget challenges and possible school closures. Yael Silk, Emma Yourd and Dwayne Barker were all but guaranteed seats on the board when the polls opened this morning with no competitors on the ballot. Mail-in ballot totals gave no indication of the emergence of any write-in challengers. Incumbent board members Pamela Harbin, Kevin Carter and William Gallagher of districts 4, 6 and 8 did not run for new terms. Read more: Allderdice and Westinghouse, 3 miles away, are worlds apart in AP classes, teacher experience, student disadvantage Dwayne Barker, a community organizer, said he will work to bring all school buildings up to date and strengthen community engagement in the district. More from Election Day 2023 Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. What is your school’s AI policy? “I believe that some of these schools that are winning, some things need to be, you know, adjusted. … The ones that are in a school like Westinghouse are probably suffering because other schools have the ability to be comfortable. And it’s not fair.” — Dwayne Barker Emma Yourd, an education and workforce development manager, said she wants to make changes at the policy level for student mental health and equitable distribution of resources. Read more: For Pittsburgh schools, per-student budgets can be thousands of dollars apart Yael Silk, executive director of Arts Education Collaborative and candidate for District 4, said she wants to ensure more transparency and accountability about allocation of funds and resources. “If we’re going to have something like a CAPA, I think it’s really important that we also have neighborhood schools where … you will have had the learning opportunities available to you to successfully get into CAPA without the supplemental need for private lessons or extracurriculars.” — Yael Silk PPS is heading into a difficult budget season — projecting a growing operating deficit, increased building overhead and operations costs, increasing charter school costs and expiration of federal COVID relief funds. Currently, the district has no concrete plan for stabilizing its deficit. Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Pennsylvania With no end to budget impasse in sight, Pa. school districts and counties warn of program cuts Gagging Academia Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Read more: Higher need, lower experience: Pittsburgh’s tenured teachers cluster in best-supported schools All three candidates said they would work with the current school board members to examine and understand the district’s finances. Silk and Barker called for a financial audit to ensure that the district is funded equitably. Yourd said she will work at rightsizing the school budgets and examine the allocation of funds to charter schools. “The current board and the board members that are getting voted in are very aware of the community trauma that was caused by the shuttering of schools under previous administrations. And so we’re very cognizant of that and want to make sure that any decisions that are made are made with full transparency and accountability to the community.” — Emma Yourd Read more: Updated: North Allegheny moves ahead with district-wide police force The district has seen steady enrollment decline since 2012. Nearly all of the district’s school buildings are less than half full and the district has enough unused seating capacity for more than 19,000 students. The current school board has resumed talks of school closures. “You want to certainly figure out the best practices for consolidation. And then from there, you want to figure out strategies to actually get these families into the proper places and spaces that are going to best serve them.” — Dwayne Barker Read more: The Pittsburgh Promise helped thousands of students pay for college. As costs rise, the funding is going away. The new candidates said their priority will be to gather community input before making decisions about closing schools. Barker said the district can partner with the city to convert schools that might be shut into affordable housing so the district can retain students who are moving out to the suburbs. “We cannot sustain the number of buildings that we currently have … and district leadership needs to come up with a plan where we have properly equipped learning spaces for our children, for our school adults and that we have that in a way that is also financially sustainable.” — Yael Silk Lajja Mistry is the K-12 education reporter at PublicSource. She can be reached at lajja@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: budget , education equity , election day , leadstorynoshow , pittsburgh education , PPS , PPS board , school closures , Transparency Lajja Mistry lajja@publicsource.org Lajja is the K-12 education reporter at Pittsburgh's Public Source. Originally from India, she moved to the States in 2021 to pursue a master’s degree in journalism from the University of Southern California.... More by Lajja Mistry