Posted in On the beat , posts Proposed bill could help ease money worries for parents of disabled students by Halle Stockton September 16, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X A proposed federal bill could alleviate the financial burden for families who challenge schools on the education provided to their special-needs children. U.S. Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, has proposed legislation that would allow parents to recover costs for expert witnesses when they win in a case against a school district under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, according to a story by the Disability Scoop. The act, referred to as IDEA , ensures children with disabilities have access to a free and appropriate education. Harkin  — a lawmaker who has been a leader in disability rights for more than two decades — has co-sponsored two rounds of amendments to strengthen the act. While attorney’s fees can be recovered by whomever prevails, a 2006 U.S. Supreme Court decision determined that costs for expert witnesses can’t. That puts parents at a disadvantage, Harkin said, since school districts often have experts on staff while families typically must incur significant costs – ranging from $100 to $300 per hour, on average — to retain such services. Expert witnesses often include psychologists, behavior specialists and physicians. The proposed IDEA Fairness Restoration Act would mean families could recoup expenses not only for their testimony, but also for tests and evaluations, according to the story. Students with disabilities get individualized education plans under IDEA. Families, school officials and teachers, as well as therapists and family doctors meet to determine children’s needs and goals. If parents believe the school district is not providing the proper resources, like personal instruction or an individualized extended-school-year program, they can file a complaint. “Without access to expert witnesses, families may be unable to make an argument for the educational needs of their children,” Harkin said. “This legislation is an essential step for protecting the rights of students with disabilities and ensuring that all families, regardless of their financial resources, can advocate for and protect their children’s rights through due process, consistent with congressional intent.” Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton