Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan August 7, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been at least six train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Mysterious Montana derailment After a 106-car crude oil train derailed last month in Montana, some are speculating about why the tank cars didn’t explode and if it’s because many of the explosive vapors were removed before it was shipped, according to The Philadelphia Inquirer . Focus on the tracks While much attention has been paid to improving tank cars, a new paper from a group promoting infrastructure investments said more needs to be done to improve railroad tracks to boost rail safety, according to The H ouston Chronicle . New Jersey crude oil train routes still kept secret Although Pennsylvania releases some information on crude oil train routes, New Jersey still shields such information from the public under an agreement Gov. Chris Christie made with CSX railroad last year, according to NorthJersey.com . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Philadelphia refinery went from near extinction to $1 billion business in just three years Philadelphia Energy Solutions went public on the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday valued at $1.3 billion, according to Philly.com. The refinery processes 335,000 barrels of crude oil per day, much of it arriving via trains from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale region. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan