Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan July 2, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X * Update: This roundup included a story that erroneously reported crude oil was transported on the train that derailed in Maryville, Tenn. There was no crude oil on the train, according to CSX. The story has since been removed. Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been at least six train derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday.* Train carrying hazardous materials derails in Tennessee A train derailed early Thursday morning in Maryville, Tenn., carrying acrylonitrile, a hazardous material used to manufacture plastics, and thousands of people were evacuated from nearby homes, according to Reuters. Report: Low income and minority communities are at a heightened risk for crude oil train derailments in California Two public interest groups released a study and maps showing California communities of color are at an elevated threat from these trains, according to Al Jazeera America. More groups file lawsuits against new U.S. DOT crude oil train rules Jumping on the bandwagon are two Chicago suburbs challenging the federal government’s new rules for increasing crude-by-rail safety. The suburbs join environmental groups, the oil industry and the railroad industry who have all filed lawsuits against the rules for different reasons, according to The Chicago Tribune. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor *PublicSource published the derailment roundup a day earlier this week to observe the Fourth of July holiday. Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan