Posted in Environment , HEALTH Are you concerned about lead in your drinking water? by Natasha Khan March 3, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Lead is a neurotoxin that can have lifelong consequences in children by affecting their brain development. There are typically no clear symptoms for parents to notice, and the health effects are permanent. If you’re concerned about lead in your home, it’s important to test your water, especially if you live in a home that was built before 1969, when Allegheny County banned the use of lead pipes. More than 70 percent of homes in Allegheny County were built before 1970. The water pipe from the street to your home, called a service line, was often made of lead before the ban was in place. Replacing an old lead service line is the responsibility of the utility, in some cases, up to the property line, and then the homeowners’ responsibility on their own property. This fix can cost several thousand dollars. To learn more about lead in drinking water, visit the CDC’s website on lead, the EPA’s information page on lead in drinking water or the Penn State Extension website on lead. Resources The Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority offers free lead tests to its customers. To request a testing kit, call 412-782-7554. Penn State Extension offers tests through its Agricultural Analytical Services Lab in State College. A lead test costs $25, and they offer a range of other drinking water tests. You can contact a Penn State Extension office in your county for a testing kit. In Allegheny County , you can reach the Extension office at 412-263-1000 or at AlleghenyExt@psu.edu . You can also search the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection’s website for an accredited laboratory and the type of drinking water test you would like administered. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Resource Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan