Posted in Coming Home PA , IN-DEPTH , Uncategorized Back from Iraq and taking comfort in the outdoors by Jenelle Pifer April 14, 2012 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X When people in the military come back from war, it’s often not an easy transition. Sometimes, interacting with the environment is a source of comfort.  Some take part in action sports for that rush of adrenaline. Others find camaraderie in group outings. The Allegheny Front’s Jenelle Pifer recently spoke to one U.S. Navy sailor from Western PA about his experiences outdoors before, during and after war. Click here to listen to this audio story on the Allegheny Front’s website. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI