Posted in Local Government , On the beat , posts Memo lays out government spending during budget impasse by PublicSource contributor March 7, 2016 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X gov_wolf After months of misinformation, Gov. Tom Wolf’s office publicized its spending during the budget impasse. In a memo released on Thursday, March 3, Pennsylvania Secretary of the Budget Randy Albright outlined the office’s spending during the budget impasse. The memo looked at spending from July 1, 2015, to December 31, 2015, six months during which the governor’s office was operating without a budget. The impasse was a result of disagreement between the Democratic governor and the Republican-led Legislature. According to the memo, the government spent $24.7 billion in General Fund payments during the impasse. Although acting without a budget, Albright stated the government only offered money to programs “critical” to health and safety operations, as well as “operations required by the constitution and federal and state law.” From the memo : During the impasse, the administration, through the office of the budget and the comptroller, worked closely with the treasury department to ensure that all payments made were required and appropriate, as in the normal course of business. The Wolf Administration continued operations for all critical functions that impact the health, safety and protection of Pennsylvanians, or was required under Federal Law, state court decisions or the Pennsylvania Constitution. On Jan. 26, 2016, the House and Senate Appropriations Committee requested a review of the Commonwealth payments. The two chairmen — Patrick Browne, the majority chairman from the Senate, and William F. Adolph, Jr., the majority chairman from the House — sent a letter to Eugene DePasquale, the auditor general, expressing skepticism over spending from the governor’s office. From the letter : While the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act was interpreted to cover the payment of employee salaries and benefits, other payments were made under various explanations provided by the Wolf administration, most notably payments that impacted the “health, safety and protection of Pennsylvanians.” However, this standard and payment exceptions do not seem well defined… We would appreciate your review and assessment of the administration’s application of the “health, safety and protection” standard, as well as any other standards they relied on — such as federal law or state court decisions — to make payments from the state treasury during the time we operated without an enacted state budget. According to the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review , DePasquale agreed to review the request in February. Jeff Sheridan, the governor’s press secretary, said the increased circulation of misinformation around the budget as a result of the hearing for the 2016-17 budget led the governor’s office to release the memo. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting “It is important for the public to have facts regarding the operation of the government,” Sheridan said in an email. “The memo from Budget Secretary Albright is a detailed explanation of the continued operations during the impasse and emphasizes our commitment to being open and transparent about how the administration is making payments.” In February, the Tribune-Review reported that, based on information from the Department of Treasury, the state government has spent $12.8 billion since January 2016. The consistent flow of money has state legislators worried that Wolf is overstepping his boundaries. From the Tribune-Review : Wolf is spending as if he has “an open checkbook,” Senate Republican spokeswoman Jennifer Kocher said Monday as lawmakers began budget hearings for the next fiscal year. “We’re concerned about the checks and balances.” Reach PublicSource intern Lauren Rosenblatt at lrosenblatt@publicsource.org. Follow her on Twitter @LRosenblatt_ . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI