Posted in On the beat , posts Disability and aging go hand in hand by Halle Stockton December 9, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X About 16 million senior citizens in America have a disability, and as people continue to live longer with disability and illness, the country’s safety net will be put to the test. The National Institute on Aging used Census data from 2008 to 2012 to analyze the health and wellness of the elderly population, which includes nearly 41 million people, according to a HealthDay News report . “With the first Baby Boomers having entered the 65-and-older ranks in 2011, the United States may experience a rapid expansion in the number of older people with a disability in the next two decades,” the report authors wrote. “The future of disability among older Americans will be affected by how this country prepares for and manages a complex array of demographic, fiscal, medical, technological and other developments that will unfold in the next several decades,” they added. The researchers found that disabilities became more common for people 85 and older and for women; about two-thirds of seniors who reported a disability were women. Socioeconomic factors were also linked to disability in the golden years. The study found that people were more likely to have a disability if they had not graduated high school and if they lived near or below the poverty line. The disabilities included in the study were impairment of hearing, vision, mobility, memory and the ability to complete basic daily activities, like dressing or using the bathroom. The most common type of disability was difficulty walking or climbing stairs, which was reported by two-thirds of seniors with a disability. Pennsylvania was one of nine states cited as being home to about half of seniors with disabilities. The highest rate of disability, at 48 percent, was found in Mississippi’s elderly population. With the elderly population expected to increase dramatically over the next decade, the National Institute on Aging urged both public and private sectors to examine the systems that serve seniors. “Disability can be reduced with improved medical treatment, positive behavioral changes, wider use of assistive technologies, rising education levels and improvements in socioeconomic status,” the report authors wrote. In Pennsylvania alone, the 60-and-older population is projected to grow from 2.7 million in 2010 to 3.3 million by 2020. Recently, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court established an Office of Elder Justice to improve access to the courts and to extend more protections to seniors who may be experiencing abuse and neglect. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Halle Stockton at 412-315-0263 or hstockton@publicsource.org. Follow her on Twitter @HalleStockton . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Disabilities Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton