Posted in Civic Briefs Peduto’s 2022 budget forecasts long recovery as he leaves office by Charlie Wolfson November 8, 2021 December 2, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pittsburgh Mayor Bill Peduto. (Photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource) Keeping local government accountable to you is our job at PublicSource, and we’re introducing this ongoing series to share more of that information with you in real time. Mayor Bill Peduto presented his eighth and final budget to Pittsburgh City Council Monday, detailing a vision for 2022 that his successor, Mayor-elect Ed Gainey, will inherit Jan. 3. The fiscal plan shows that the city’s economic recovery from the pandemic will be in progress for the foreseeable future, but the city’s books are well reinforced by federal aid for the next few years. The budget projects 2022 tax revenue lower than pre-COVID levels when adjusted for inflation, with tax revenues expected to miss pre-COVID projections at least through 2024. The budget projects $504 million in tax revenue in 2022. This is up almost 2% from the last pre-COVID budget, the 2020 budget enacted in December 2019. But when adjusted for inflation, the projected 2022 revenue is down about 5%. “We will continue to feel the stresses of the pandemic for the next few years,” Peduto said in his speech to council Monday. Total revenue, which includes tens of millions from the federal American Rescue Plan, is projected to be up 8% from the last pre-COVID budget, or about 1% adjusted for inflation. Council will hold public hearings on the budget and must approve it, possibly with amendments, by the end of the year. Peduto also introduced a $159 million capital budget, a higher amount than in recent years, which is mostly used to fund construction and infrastructure projects and also includes American Rescue Plan dollars. Gainey will have a chance to work with council to amend the budgets in January. Compared to projections for 2021 made last fall, the city projects big rebounds for a few sources of tax revenue in 2022: Adjusting for inflation, the city projects a roughly 19% increase in payroll preparation tax revenue, a 128% jump in amusement tax revenue and a 15% rise in facility usage fees. But none of the other taxes, including the real estate tax, are expected to rise against inflation in 2022. The city’s income tax, its second largest source of tax revenue, is expected to be about even with last year’s projection when adjusted for inflation. In December 2019, the city projected that its revenue in 2024 would be about $672 million. Now, it projects its revenue for 2024 to be $681 million. But about $46 million of that comes from the American Rescue Plan, which ends after 2024 — meaning the city could face a budget crunch going forward if other revenue doesn’t increase significantly. The city departments with the largest increase in expenditures in the 2022 budget compared to 2021 are Parks and Recreation (17%), Public Works Administration (28%) and the new Office of Community Health and Safety, which received its first significant budget ($5.02 million). The largest decrease is at Public Safety Administration (-32%). Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting The Bureau of Police budget rose 4.6% from 2021 and 4.9% from the 2020 budget. Peduto’s chief of staff, Dan Gilman, said in an email that the increase in police budget is due to wage increases in the police union contract. Charlie Wolfson is PublicSource’s local government reporter and a Report for America corps member. He can be reached at charlie@publicsource.org and on Twitter @chwolfson . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Charlie Wolfson charlie@publicsource.org x Charlie Wolfson is an enterprise reporter for Pittsburgh's Public Source, focusing on local government accountability and politics in Pittsburgh and Allegheny County. He was a Report for America corps... More by Charlie Wolfson