Posted in PPS' Path Forward Closures, grade reconfigurations and magnet phase-outs floated in PPS facilities plan A proposed plan for streamlining the district’s assets lays out big changes for the Pittsburgh Public system. by Lajja Mistry and Jillian Forstadt August 13, 2024 September 24, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Angela King Smith, Partner at Education Resource Strategies presents to PPS board members on Aug. 13 (Photo by Cameron Croston/PublicSource) PPS’ Path Forward Investigating the development and implications of Pittsburgh Public Schools’ plans to reshape the district. Closures, consolidations and reconfigurations may come to Pittsburgh Public Schools, according to a sweeping facilities plan presented to the school board Tuesday. The Facilities Utilization Plan has been under development since April, when the district announced it had contracted Education Resources Strategies to develop a roadmap for economizing the district’s sprawling, underutilized building stock. The board is set to vote in the new year, following additional public meetings and finalized recommendations. The timeline for implementing the full slate of proposals is expected once Education Resource Strategies presents its final recommendations next month, but consultants say implementing a plan as comprehensive as this one could take three to five years. Listen to PublicSource ‘s Lajja Mistry and 90.5 WESA ‘s Jillian Forstadt explain this story The plan shared Aug. 13 recommended a complete overhaul of the district’s grade configurations, moving to K-5, 6-8 and 9-12 grade models. With that, they also announced plans to phase out six full magnet programs and create new neighborhood magnets, meaning students in that neighborhood will have a guaranteed spot in the school. Consolidations and closures were recommended based on proximity between two buildings, access to spaces and building capacity. The proposal did not take into consideration standalone Early Childhood Centers, Conroy, Pioneer, Clayton and the Gifted Center, which consultants say require more consideration due to their specialized purposes. “We’re being intentionally bold here,” said Joseph Trawick-Smith with Education Resource Strategies. Here are the new grade configurations and school closures proposed in each region: South/West region: Consolidations: Brookline K-8 becomes a K-5 school. Its 6-8 students go to Carmalt. Carmalt K-8 becomes a 6-8 school. K-5 students will attend the new Brookline K-5. Carmalt magnet will be phased out. Langley K-8 becomes K-5 and 6-8 students attend Classical 6-8. Classical magnet phased out. Arlington K-8 will become a 6-8 school and K-5 will attend Grandview K-5, Beechwood K-5 or West Liberty K-5. Closures: Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Whittier K-5 closes and students would attend new Langley K-5 or Westwood K-5. Roosevelt K-5 closes and students go to West Liberty K-5 or Concord K-5. South Hills 6-8 closes, and its students go to new Arlington 6-8. South Brook 6-8 closes, and students attend new Carmalt 6-8. Pioneer students will remain in South Brook building. Carrick 9-12 closes, and students go to Brashear 9-12. Carrick will become a designated Career and Technical Education [CTE] center. North region: Consolidations: King K-8 becomes a 6-8 school. Allegheny K-8 becomes a K-5 and its 6-8 students go to the new King 6-8. Morrow K-8 becomes a K-5 and 6-8 students attend the new King 6-8. Closures: Manchester closes. Its 6-8 grade students go to new King 6-8 and K-5 students go to new Morrow K-5. Schiller 6-8 closes, and students go to new King 6-8. Spring Hill K-5 closes, and students attend Allegheny K-5. Other considerations: King 6-8 and Perry 9-12 become STEM programs for neighborhood students on the North Side . A new CAPA 6-8 to be housed in the Manchester building and a CAPA 9-12 in Downtown. CAPA 9-12 will expand with more available space in the Downtown building. East/Center region: Consolidations: Sunnyside K-8 becomes a K-5 school and 6-8 students go to Arsenal 6-8. Westinghouse 6-12 becomes a 9-12 school and 6-8 students attend Sterrett 6-8. Colfax K-8 becomes a 6-8 school and K-5 students go to Greenfield K-5 or Minadeo K-5. Mifflin K-8 becomes a K-5 school and 6-8 students go to a new Colfax 6-8. Obama 6-12 becomes a 9-12 school and 6-8 students go to Arsenal 6-8. Both schools become neighborhood magnets, offering International Baccalaureate programs. Sci-Tech 6-12 becomes a 9-12 school and UPrep Milliones 6-12 becomes a 6-8 school. Students move between both schools, which become neighborhood magnets focusing on STEM. Closures: Woolslair K-5 closes, and students go to Sunnyside K-5 or Liberty K-5. Arsenal K-5 closes, and students go to Sunnyside K-5 or Liberty K-5. Fulton K-5 closes, and students go to Dilworth K-5. Lincoln K-5 closes, and students go to Faison K-5. Weil K-5 closes, and students go to Miller K-5. Montessori K-5 locates to a vacated Linden building. Magnet programs at Linden, Liberty and Dilworth are phased out over a few years. Dilworth and Liberty become neighborhood schools, while Linden becomes the new location of the district’s Montessori building. Consultants also proposed renovating many of the facilities expected to serve more students so that every school has: More dedicated special education classrooms Air conditioning Science labs in 6-8 and 9-12 schools Expanded spaces for CTE programming in 9-12 Dedicated art and music rooms The proposal includes renovations specifically at: Morrow Intermediate Westwood Phillips Grandview Banksville West Liberty Brookline Sunnyside According to Trawick-Smith, making these renovations would significantly reduce the number of buildings districtwide that require moderate or major renovations. At the same time, he said the proposed school closures would impact a higher share of the district’s Black and Latinx students compared to its white and Asian students. “We could see some significant changes here, but I do want to raise it, because obviously one of the key factors is, ‘How are we disproportionately impacting any student group?’” Trawick-Smith said. “And I would say in this scenario, we are in certain places.” Pittsburgh Public Schools board members and staff listen to Angela King Smith during a presentation on Aug. 13. (Photo by Cameron Croston/PublicSource) Four regional community input sessions will be held by school board President Gene Walker and PPS Superintendent Wayne Walters in the coming weeks to talk through what happens next. Those will be held on Aug. 22, Sept. 3, Sept. 4 and Sept. 5. A webinar on the proposal will also be held on Aug. 27, as well as what the district is calling “Pop Up Days” on Aug. 15, Aug. 20 and Aug. 23 in several harder-to-reach communities throughout the city. More information about those events will be added to the district’s website in the coming days. Board member Devon Taliaferro said because Manchester is located between two K-8 charter schools, families may move out of the district instead of going to a new CAPA 6-8 in the building. She emphasized the need to support the community and potentially house a recreation or education center to meet the neighborhood needs. PPS' Path Forward PPS records show 90% of buildings need costly renovations as district weighs school closures The district is using the Facilities Condition Index to assess the quality of its buildings and to determine potential school closures. Board member Dwayne Barker echoed the sentiment, saying that bringing CAPA students into the Manchester building makes it seem that Manchester students are not worthy of being in the building, instead prioritizing making space for students with special talents. “This is school gentrification at its finest,” he said. Board members, district and consultants have repeatedly expressed the need for substantial changes to the district’s footprint, in part due to the district’s tightening budget. While the district was able to shrink its operating deficit for the 2024 budget from nearly $30 million to just $2.2 million earlier this year, the pandemic relief ESSER III funds that helped stabilize its finances are set to expire next month. Growing charter school costs and reductions in property tax revenue, meanwhile, continue to contribute to gaps between spending and revenue. With that, the district has lost 26% of its student population in the last decade, and according to the state Department of Education, PPS is predicted to lose another 5,800 students by 2031. The district is also struggling with staffing shortages in certain areas such as paraprofessionals, STEM and foreign language. Consultant Joseph Trawick-Smith speaks to PPS board members and the public about recommendations for the district’s future on Aug 13. (Photo by Cameron Croston/PublicSource) Superintendent Wayne Walters said there is more work to be done in the process, and the district will now be going into a listening space to hear from the community before the final recommendations are presented. “We want the families to know that we’re still listening,” he said, “but we heard them and we’re trying to make things, to make education better in Pittsburgh Public Schools for all of our children.” What questions do you have about the future of Pittsburgh Public Schools? We’d love to hear from you . Jillian Forstadt is the education reporter at 90.5 WESA. She can be reached at jforstadt@wesa.fm . Lajja Mistry is the K-12 education reporter at PublicSource. She can be reached at lajja@publicsource.org . This story was produced in a partnership between WESA and PublicSource . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: 90.5 WESA , City Cast , closures , consolidations , education , feeder pattern , pittsburgh public schools , PPS Lajja Mistry lajja@publicsource.org Lajja is the K-12 education reporter at Pittsburgh's Public Source. Originally from India, she moved to the States in 2021 to pursue a master’s degree in journalism from the University of Southern California.... More by Lajja Mistry