Posted in DEVELOP PGH The URA in the Williamson era Pittsburgh’s Urban Redevelopment Authority has taken more than 90 significant actions since Sam Williamson became the chair in February 2019. Here are a dozen of the most significant. by Rich Lord April 20, 2020 November 5, 2021 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Construction workers pour dirt near the Produce Terminal in Pittsburgh's Strip District in late February 2019. (Photo by Kat Procyck/PublicSource) All Neighborhoods Housing Opportunity Fund Allocated $10 million in city tax dollars to funding affordable rental and for-sale housing, helping homeowners make repairs, helping people stay in rental housing, and helping people make down payments. Neighborhood Initiatives Fund Created program of small grants — no more than $100,000 — to assist nonprofit and community-based organizations with neighborhood-scale projects. Service Workers Prevailing Wage Policy Adopted policy under which building workers in structures backed by URA grants, specified loan products, bond financing, infrastructure improvements and below-market property sales or leases above certain thresholds get prevailing wages. Williamson spoke but abstained from the vote. Central Business District City’s Edge Authorized parking tax diversion to finance $4.2 million to aid in the development by Midpoint Group and the Hill Community Development Corp. of a 508-space parking garage, commercial and community space, and 110 apartments, of which 77 will be income-restricted. Total $61 million development. Central North Side Federal North Approved a development proposal by Trek Development and Q Development to build apartments in the former Garden Theater block. Chateau Esplanade Entered into an option agreement to sell five lots for $1.5 million to a group led by Millcraft Investments as part of a proposed $528 million mixed-use complex. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Related: Once a foil of the city’s master builders, Sam Williamson now guides the URA while leading a union, advocates and a political ‘army.’ Downtown 412 Boulevard of the Allies Approved a variety of contracts connected with the purchase, renovation and management of the former Art Institute of Pittsburgh building, now housing the URA and other city agencies. Larimer Former Larimer School Granted $2.8 million — partly state funds — to the Housing Authority of the City of Pittsburgh for the redevelopment of the former Larimer School. Stabilization and remediation costs estimated at $3.2 million. Lower Hill District Pittsburgh Arena Redevelopment Authorized agreement with Pittsburgh Arena Redevelopment LP and the Sports & Exhibition Authority to clarify responsibilities of all parties regarding the development of 21.5 acres of the former Civic Arena site. Required affordable housing. Middle Hill New Granada Square Sold 12 parcels, 21,207 square feet, to the development team of CHN Housing Partners, the Hill Community Development Corp., for $125,000 for commercial and 40 affordable rental apartments. Total cost $14.5 million. Shadyside Hunt Armory Bought Hunt Armory from the state Department of General Services for $1 million. The earlier agreement required the URA to convey the Hunt Armory to a third party for fair market value by Dec. 31, 2019, and the state gets 80%. URA had chosen Mosites, Light and Metz as redeveloper, but because the URA wasn’t going to get the deal done by that date, it renegotiated with the state and agreed to pay $1 million to buy the building outright. Strip District Produce Terminal Authorized start of construction by McCaffery Interests and a $4 million tax-increment financing loan to cover Smallman Street improvements, plus the financing of as much as $1 million for the relocation of the Society for Arts in Crafts, also known as the Society for Contemporary Craft. Source: URA board meeting minutes This story was produced in partnership with Pittsburgh Magazine . Rich Lord is PublicSource’s economic development reporter. He can be reached at rich@publicsource.org or on Twitter @richelord . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Rich Lord rich@publicsource.org x Rich is the managing editor of Pittsburgh's Public Source. He joined the team in 2020, serving as a reporter focused on housing and economic development and an assistant editor. He reported for the Pittsburgh... More by Rich Lord