In-Depth Reporting ‘Young Black Pittsburgh’ ambassadors connect with the girls who shared their stories through letters By PublicSource and YNGBLKPGH August, 2017 A collaboration between YNGBLKPGH ambassadors — beacons of African-American excellence in Pittsburgh — have written letters to the black girls who shared their personal stories with the city through PublicSource. The letters are meant to provide these thoughtful young ladies with insight gained over the years and hope for the future. Read Camille's letter to Keliyah I encourage you to constantly challenge yourself and abandon your comforts... Camille's letter Read Halle's original story 11-year-old Keliyah wants to be a lawyer, sings a special song Read Victoria's letter to Sienna My identity as a mixed-race person is probably called into question more than any other parts of my intersectionality. Victoria's letter Read Sienna's original story The parts of me that can’t be mixed and matched Read Velissa's letter to Tamia Your ultimate goal is to say this is where I am from, and this will not define me. I will be great. Velissa's letter Read Tamia's original story Living in Clairton: ‘Nobody really cares unless it is football’ Read Emmai's letter to Monet You have demonstrated resilience, and hard work will always lead you to a better tomorrow. Emmai's letter Read Mary's original story She lost her mom and her home. How Monet is finding a promising future in Pittsburgh. Read Brandi's letter to Dezmaire You will push through. You will be a great mother. You will be an educated black woman. Brandi's letter Read Mary's original story Dezmaire gave birth in eighth grade. As a teen mom in Pittsburgh, she’s fighting to beat the odds and graduate. Read Cydney's letter to Maia While you can’t change the way a person thinks or feels, I believe you can prove their thoughts and feelings wrong. That can be done by simply being you. Cydney's letter Read Maia's original story I am black, I am a student, and I’m tired of racism on my campus Read Brittini's letter to Donise Although you may not see very many young black people around you now, you are still in good company. Brittini's letter Read Donise's original story Why don’t more students at Pittsburgh’s Gifted Center look like me? Read Tamara's letter to Liza, Ciara and Cheyenne Black girls are now able to research and find the answers for themselves instead of having to rely on a single authority for information about sex. Tamara's letter Read Mary's original story Do black girls pay a higher price when comprehensive sex education isn’t taught? Read Ashley's Letter to Amariah As a young black woman, throughout your life you will have an energy that even if you wanted to deny it, you couldn’t. It will intimidate people… Ashley's letter Read Amariah's original story Racism can be difficult to prove, but I think it happened to me Read Jumbe's Letter to Zoe A lot of people haven’t had the chance to travel across the world like you have, so hearing your experiences may be their only chance to be taught. Jumbe's letter Read Zoe's original story ‘I hid my accent and culture. I was just always the new black girl.’ Read Daile's Letter to Sienna You are going to do many amazing things in your lifetime, and it will be your differences that will be your strengths. Daile's Letter Read Sienna's original story The parts of me that can’t be mixed and matched