Posted in Daily report , posts September 5, 2015 by PublicSource contributor September 5, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Sports team asking price at $750M Owners Mario Lemieux and Ron Burkle are looking to sell the Pittsburgh Penguins franchise for a record $750 million . Lemieux and Burkle could sell the team but retain rights on the old 28-acre Civic Arena site, officials say. Pittsburgh: Education official to step down next year Linda Lane, the Pittsburgh Public Schools superintendent, will leave her position in June 2016 when her contract expires rather than seeking an extension. Lane, 65, began her career teaching first grade and was appointed superintendent in December 2010. Pittsburgh: Judge refuses to recuse Judge Richard E. McCormick Jr., who represented a Tribune-Review printers’ union more than 25 years ago, said his prior involvement with the paper would not influence his rulings in the current Scaife case. The more recent dispute concerns the estate of Richard Mellon Scaife, the newspaper’s late publisher. Lewisburg: Three arrested for rock-throwing Three young men will serve jail time for throwing a rock from an interstate overpass in July 2014, hitting a teacher in a car and causing her brain damage. They apologized to their victim, Sharon Budd, who had to have seven brain surgeries, and were ordered to pay restitution Monaca: Glass factory blaze About 50 employees evacuated an Anchor Hocking plant after a grease fire engulfed the facility Thursday night. No injuries were reported. NATIONAL Gay marriages carry on in Kentucky James Yates and William Smith Jr. were the first same-sex couple to marry in Rowan County after County Clerk Kim Davis was sent to jail. Davis was arrested for refusing to issue marriage licenses to gay couples, and deputy clerk Brian Mason granted this license. Feds institute new policy for cell phone tracking The U.S. Justice Department is requiring warrants on technology that can locate and track cell phones. Federal agents and local police have used the equipment to fight national crime, although it was intended to hunt terrorists overseas. NFL appeals court’s decision The NFL appealed a judge’s decision to dismiss Tom Brady’s suspension for his alleged involvement in Deflategate. Brady is free to play while an appeals court considers the case. Scuffle at Trump Tower A member of Donald Trump’s security detail punched an aggressive protester who grabbed him during a demonstration in Manhattan. Trump was in New York to announce he would not run as a third-party candidate, and the protest ignited over his comments about immigrants. IN OTHER NEWS #ForceFriday Yesterday’s Force Friday event encouraged stores to sell new “Star Wars” merchandise in anticipation of the December opening of “Star Wars: Episode VII — The Force Awakens.” Some items included lightsabers, action figures, a Millennium Falcon bed and a functional droid. The daily report was compiled by Elaina Zachos, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at ezachos@publicsource.org . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.