Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Ohio officials link fracking to recent earthquakes, shut down drilling at site by Natasha Khan April 16, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X For the first time, Ohio regulators said recent earthquakes in the state were probably caused by fracking operations. In early March, five small earthquakes up to 3.0 in magnitude shook Mahoning County, which is close to the Pennsylvania-Ohio border. Youngstown, Ohio, experienced a separate series of earthquakes in 2011 and 2012, but those were linked to nearby deep underground injection wells used to store fracking wastewater. PublicSource wrote about the political aftermath of those earthquakes last year. The recent earthquakes are the first documented cases in Ohio that show the likelihood that hydraulic fracturing can cause earthquakes. From the Youngstown Vindicator : [Ohio Department of Natural Resources] geologists believe the sand and water injected into the well during the hydraulic fracturing process may have increased pressure on an unknown microfault in the area,” the agency responsible for regulating the state’s oil and gas industry said in a statement. On March 23, The Vindicator reported that geologists outside of an Ohio Department of Natural Resources investigation were considering the theory that fluid from a fracking well at the Carbon Limestone Landfill could have seeped into an unknown fault extending upward from the Precambrian basement, causing the ground to shake March 10. ODNR’s investigation turned up no link to the Precambrian formation, but it did indicate that fracking aggravated a small, previously undetected fault in the overlying Paleozoic rock. As a result, Ohio state officials have issued new permit conditions in certain areas, thought to be some of the strictest in the nation, according to a recent Associated Press article. More from the AP : Under the new permit conditions, all new drilling sites in Ohio within 3 miles of a known fault or seismic activity of 2.0 magnitude or higher will be conditioned on the installation of sensitive seismic-monitoring equipment. Results will be directly available to regulators, Simmers said, so the state isn’t reliant on drilling operators providing the data voluntarily. If seismic activity of 1.0 magnitude or greater is felt, drilling will be paused for evaluation. If a link is found, the operation will be halted. Ohio officials ordered an indefinite moratorium on drilling at the Hilcorp Energy Co. site, where the March earthquakes occurred. However, oil and gas extraction still continues at five existing wells at the site. It’s the Utica Shale getting tapped at this site, not the better-known Marcellus Shale. The Utica Shale lies below the Marcellus and companies have only recently started drilling it. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org or 412-315-0261. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Tagged: Energy , Marcellus Shale Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan