Posted in Daily report , posts Oct. 30, 2015 by PublicSource contributor October 30, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Pennsylvania Pittsburgh: Cycling group calls for change After three fatalities in the last week, including a woman who was killed in a bicycle-car accident in the Oakland area, Bike Pittsburgh is petitioning for immediate safety changes. The group is asking for adjustments such as speed bumps, educational programs and traffic enforcement so bikers and motorists can better share the road. Pittsburgh: Public schools partner with Wilkinsburg The Pittsburgh Public School board voted 7-2 Wednesday to allow middle and high school students from Wilkinsburg, where enrollment has been declining, to attend George Westinghouse Academy. Lycoming County: Army blimp lands in Muncy An unmanned Army surveillance blimp hovered over central Pennsylvania , hitting power lines and causing outages before finally going down in Muncy. Police used shotguns to deflate the blimp that broke away from a Maryland military facility on Wednesday. Pittsburgh: Pirates receive record ratings on Root Sports Although the post-season ended almost as soon as it started for the Pittsburgh Pirates, telecasts hit a record high for Root Sports, which holds the regional rights to broadcast the games, in 2015. An average of 250,000 people were watching each game, according to Nielsen Media Research data, and their household ratings were the third-highest among all Major League Baseball teams. Allentown: Businesses to assist police officers buying homes in center city Allentown’s Live Near Your Work program is expanding, now applying to its police officers. Nine businesses that are part of the Downtown Allentown Community Development Initiative offer workers money toward closing costs and other expenses if they buy property within central city limits. The movement is meant to develop better relationships with residents in the community. National FDA cracks down on stores’ illegal tobacco sales The Food and Drug Administration shut down tobacco sales at eight stores that have repeatedly sold products to kids under the age of 18. The stores in New Jersey, Michigan, Illinois, Maryland and Missouri all have 30 days to stop selling tobacco products or appeal the decision. Paul Ryan elected speaker After weeks of uncertainty, Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wisc.) was elected Thursday as the 54th Speaker of the House. EMT suspended for unauthorized stop Qwasie Reid, A New York City Emergency Medical Technician, was suspended without pay after he left his ambulance that was transporting a nursing home patient to rescue a 7-year-old girl who was choking. Despite his efforts, the girl is on life support. It is against the ambulance company’s policy for drivers to make unauthorized stops. World China’s one-child policy is no more China announced it would abandon its “one-child policy” and allow couples to have two children. The decision stemmed from concerns about labor shortages and the rise in the elderly population, which could strain the economy. In Other News Makeup artist applies cosmetics without the use of hands Makeup artist Jessica Ruiz applies makeup to clients by using her mouth to hold the brushes. Because of a congenital birth defect, she has limited use of her hands. But Ruiz can apply foundation, blush and eyeliner by biting down on her tools. The Daily Report was compiled by Christine Manganas, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at cmanganas@publicsource.org Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI