Posted in Inside our Newsroom Inside our Newsroom: The passion of our readers (and fun photos too!) by Jennie Ewing Liska December 29, 2019 January 7, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Open Streets Pittsburgh attendees participate in our “We the Public” photobooth (Photos by Moxie Events) Open Streets Pittsburgh attendees participate in our “We the Public” photobooth (Photos by Moxie Events) I’m wrapping up a fantastic first year as PublicSource’s Director of Loyalty Programs. People often ask me what I do in my role at PublicSource, so I thought I’d share how I spent my 2019 with you all, our readers and supporters. I saw many of you out at community events, conferences and forums, onsite at local businesses and during one-on-one discussions. I met some of you using the PublicSource photobooth at Open Streets Pittsburgh (pictured above) and discussed what you’d like to see PublicSource do in the future. I’m always amazed by the passion our readers have for PublicSource’s coverage of Pittsburgh’s stories. This year, I also worked with local organizations to design mutually beneficial partnerships. You may have recently noticed business and nonprofit sponsorships in our email newsletters. Our sponsors believe in the power of local journalism and support us financially or by helping us to access other resources. Look out for more creative partnerships between PublicSource and local organizations in the next year and please email or call me with partnership ideas. Get involved! I love that there are so many different ways for you to support the PublicSource mission: by reading, sharing our content on social media, buying products from our sponsors, attending our events or donating directly. Your support is what allows us to continue producing the news that can’t wait. Please consider supporting the work that our talented journalists do in any way that feels right to you. Jennie Ewing Liska Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Jennie Ewing Liska jennie@publicsource.org Jennie is co-executive director of revenue and operations. She oversees revenue generation and relationship development to support the growth of Public Source and manages internal business operations.... More by Jennie Ewing Liska