Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts Study: Extreme weather doesn’t sway views on climate change by Natasha Khan December 3, 2014 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Does experiencing extreme weather events affect how people view climate change? Not so much, according a new study published Monday in the journal Global Environmental Change. The study’s author, Michigan State University sociologist Sandra Marquart-Pyatt, told VICE News “we only see really a sprinkling of effects of climate on people’s perceptions.” From VICE : Marquart-Pyatt finds that a person’s feelings about climate change have very little to do with the weather outside and almost everything to do with political ideology and party affiliation. Marquart-Pyatt and her co-authors reviewed dozens of papers on the emerging science of linking climate beliefs to climate realities, all of which were published after 2005. They found that despite some correlations between factors like temperature the day before the study was conducted and belief in climate change, no study found sufficient reason to believe that experiencing actual climate change will sway the public toward supporting climate policy. The researchers used records that provided them with 800 different parameters to assess the link between climate change and public perception, according to the article. The study combined Gallup poll data with US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Climate Extremes Index, “which compiles precipitation, temperature, tropical storm and hurricane wind velocity, drought severity data from across the country.” They found that only eight of the 800 parameters showed a statistically significant relationship, but political ideology or party affiliation was linked to climate change in every model. From VICE : “There is very strong convergence on the dominant role of ideology or political party in shaping beliefs about climate change and science,” Lawrence Hamilton, a sociologist at the University of New Hampshire and co-author of the 2013 polling study, told VICE News. “That is the main positive finding here and I think it’s unquestionably true.” Reach Natasha Khan at 412-315-0261 or at nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @khantasha. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan