Posted in Daily report , posts Aug. 21, 2015 by PublicSource contributor August 21, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: 50 most powerful people A list of people who control government, business, foundations and nonprofits shows that white, Democratic men have the most influence in Pittsburgh. Grant Oliphant, president of the Heinz Endowments, is No. 1, and he’s followed by President and CEO of UPMC Jeffrey Romoff and Mayor Bill Peduto. Pittsburgh: 12 gun homicides since Memorial Day Pittsburgh City Paper put together this interactive map detailing the locations of summer gun homicides. Most of the victims are younger than 30. They’re also profiling people who are connected to the communities where the killings have occurred. Pittsburgh: Pay for parking on a smartphone In two months, a Pittsburgh Parkmobile app is scheduled to become available. It interacts with the Parking Authority’s meters, making it possible to pay with a credit card remotely. On top of that, the app can alert users when the meter is about to expire — potentially preventing a lot of tickets. Erie: Police shut down day care Erie police investigated the Safe Haven II childcare facility, which was suspected of being used outside of its intended purposes. City zoning officials have pulled the day care’s occupancy permit , and the business has since closed. Police initially responded to complaints of after-hours gatherings involving loud music, fighting and gunshots. Philadelphia: Convicted killer makes no concessions to avoid death penalty Shaun Warrick, convicted on Wednesday for two February 2011 murders, is now at the mercy of 12 jurors. Warrick’s lawyer pleaded for his life at his death penalty hearing , even after Warrick turned down two plea deals that would have saved him. Statewide: Medicaid expansion streamlines enrollment Gov. Tom Wolf’s expansion of Medicaid, called HealthChoices , is said to have both hastened and eased the enrollment process. The Department of Human Services reports it regularly offers decisions within 22 days of the application, but opponents still fear it will be too costly. NATIONAL Some breast cancer treatments might be unnecessary Stage 0 breast cancer, a.k.a. ductal carcinoma in situ , can be a precursor to a malignant tumor, and doctors often advise women to have lumpectomies or mastectomies as a preventative measure. But a longitudinal study published in JAMA Oncology suggests that these disfiguring surgeries may be unnecessary for some women or do nothing to prevent the onset of the disease. ‘Power of the purse’ lawsuit against Obama gaining traction The House is attempting to bring a lawsuit against the Obama administration over potentially spending money that had not been appropriated by Congress. Top aides are accused of planning to spend $178 billion over the next decade in reimbursements to Obamacare health insurers; because this wasn’t explicitly approved by Congress, they regard the spending as unconstitutional. Top 10 lucrative careers Not surprisingly, surgeons and other medical professions as well as engineers and corporate executives make the list, but did you know that air traffic controllers make an average of $122,000 a year? IN OTHER NEWS Replacing 420 mile markers Idaho recently replaced its 420 highway mile markers with signs labeled 419.9. Transportation officials had to change the markers because stoners consistently stole the mileposts associated with marijuana. Colorado and Washington have already switched to 419.9 signs. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.