Posted in Daily report , posts July 17, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 17, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: President Obama to visit next week President Obama will speak at the Veterans of Foreign Wars national convention next Tuesday at the David L. Lawrence Convention Center downtown. The convention is not open to the public, but it can be streamed online starting 8 a.m. Monday. Pittsburgh: Man who ‘pantsed’ female joggers sentenced to house arrest Robert Flynn was arrested in November for pulling down the pants of four female joggers on the North Side trail, and he spent a month in prison for it. After his release, he did it two more times and spent six more months in jail. A judge sentenced him to counseling, a year of house arrest and four years of probation. Pittsburgh: 36 hours in Pittsburgh As part of the New York Times series, a reporter spent three days in the city trying out various restaurants and sights. The itinerary is broken down in full . Some places he visited included City of Asylum, Bread and Salt Bakery, Cure, Row House Cinema and Bicycle Heaven. Harrisburg: Teens want cases moved to juvenile court Five teenagers were charged as adults with robbery and and other crimes after their spree ended when they attempted to hold up two state representatives. Four of them are trying to avoid being charged as adults, so the case is on hold until the petitions are processed. Centre County: Police chase the result of a medical condition? The 52-year-old driver veered erratically across both lanes of traffic. An unmarked police car tailed the driver, who led the officer on a 10 to 15 mph chase before stopping. The police report indicates he was suffering from some kind of medical condition and was hospitalized for it, but it wasn’t named. Philadelphia: Philly Housing Authority bans smoking in public housing The Housing Authority’s Board of Commissioners voted unanimously to eliminate smoking from all public housing units, making Philly the largest city to enact such a ban. The restriction goes into effect Aug. 5. NATIONAL Four Marines plus gunman killed in Chattanooga, Tenn. Authorities believe a lone gunman attacked the Navy and Marine Corps Reserve Center , an act they are considering domestic terrorism. The gunman was identified as Muhammad Youssef Abdulazeez . The investigation was in initial stages as of Thursday afternoon. Jury reaches verdict in Aurora, Colo., movie theater shooting James Holmes has been found guilty of murder . The jury deliberated for 13 hours before reaching this decision, and must now decide on the penalty: execution or a life sentence without parole. Congress hopes to reform No Child Left Behind On Thursday, the Senate passed a revised version of President Bush’s standardized testing law. The House passed a version of its own last week, so the ultimate fate of the revisions is unclear. Among other changes, the Senate version would keep the tests as significant factors to advance; the House bill does not. IN OTHER NEWS 2015 Emmy nominations HBO’s “ Game of Thrones ” leads with 24 nominations; “American Horror Story: Freak Show” has 19; and “House of Cards,” “Mad Men” and “Transparent” each have 11. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.