Advertise with us Pittsburgh’s Public Source informs and inspires the Pittsburgh region through the power of deep, independent journalism. We are inviting corporations, small businesses, nonprofits and other institutions to connect with our growing, engaged Pittsburgh audience and show support for local journalism. Read more about why Public Source accepts sponsorships and encourages our readers to support our sponsors. Opportunities for interested organizations include: Ads: Placement opportunities are available at a variety of price points in our newsletters and on our website. Sponsorships: Gifts from organizations help underwrite our local, independent coverage. Sponsorship opportunities are available for Public Source events and general underwriting. Partnerships: Creative collaborations with mission-aligned organizations that create exponential value for both parties. We are looking for partners who want to develop ideas together. Advertising opportunities Display advertising on publicsource.org Email newsletter advertising Sponsored content Sponsored headlines Event calendar sponsorship Your own dedicated email to our readers Social media promotions Podcast sponsorship Event sponsorship Sponsored Sponsored by Contemporary Craft Sponsored Sponsored by Kelly Strayhorn Theater Sponsored Sponsored by Pennsylvania Women Work Sponsored Sponsored by Greater Pittsburgh Nonprofit Partnership (GPNP) Sponsored Sponsored by Rivers of Steel Sponsored Sponsored by City of Asylum Sponsored Sponsored by Rivers of Steel Sponsored Sponsored by Pennsylvania Women Work Sponsored Sponsored by Greater Pittsburgh Nonprofit Partnership (GPNP) Sponsored Sponsored by Greater Pittsburgh Nonprofit Partnership (GPNP) Sponsored Sponsored by Rivers of Steel Sponsored Sponsored by Literacy Pittsburgh Sponsored Sponsored by Emmaus Community of Pittsburgh Sponsored Sponsored by Rivers of Steel Sponsored Sponsored by Literacy Pittsburgh Additional details about our audience, along with our advertising and sponsorship packages are available in our media kit. Contact us for more information Name (Required) First Last Email (Required) Phone Δ Editorial Independence Policy Public Source subscribes to the Institute for Nonprofit News (INN) standards of editorial independence, retaining full authority over editorial content to protect the best journalistic and business interests of our organization. See the full statement of editorial independence here . Political Advertising Policy Public Source does not accept advertising or support from political campaigns or candidates. Advertising Due Dates All advertising content is due one week (seven days) prior to the publish date. Publication dates may change as a result of late content delivery. Ads can be rescheduled with 1 week (7 days) notice. About Public Source About Newsletters Contact us Send tips & ideas Advertise with us Donate Membership FAQs Republishing guidelines Our partners Board of Directors Jobs Working with us