Posted in Daily report , posts July 31, 2015 by PublicSource contributor July 31, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Police chief hints at new anti-violence programs Police Chief Cameron McLay said he is forming new plans to reduce violence in the city, one of which is an online crime database that will allow people to track violence in their neighborhoods. The police department is also hiring a crime analyst to put together quarterly reports of crime statistics. Pittsburgh: Peduto discusses pension reform Peduto supports the Republican plan that would shift state employees’ pensions to something similar to a 401k. Peduto told the Tribune-Review : “It’s mathematically impossible to finance our pensions based on the rules of the state right now,” and criticized Gov. Tom Wolf’s plan to borrow $3 billion to patch pension systems that need more like $50 billion. Philadelphia: U.S. Rep. Fattah indicted Federal prosecutors unleashed an 85-page indictment against U.S. Rep. Chaka Fattah, D-Phila., on Wednesday. Fattah and four others are alleged to have run a racketeering conspiracy during Fattah’s 2007 mayoral run. Cumberland County: Special election to rack up big bills Although only one race is on the ballot — filling a vacant House seat in the 87th District — Tuesday’s upcoming election will cost just as much as a regular election, between $60,000 and $70,000 for the county. The poll spaces need to be rented, poll workers need to be paid and and supplies need to be purchased. Chester County: Legionella found at West Chester University “Higher-than-acceptable” levels of the bacteria were found in eight campus buildings , and one employee has contracted Legionnaire’s disease. The university is treating the affected water cooling towers. Southeastern Pennsylvania: Early childhood education programs underfunded A study of 150 early education programs shows that they all operate on extremely limited budgets, regardless of quality. An average year of programming costs $12,000, but the maximum state subsidy is $9,000. And the teachers providing the services make less than half of what public school teachers earn. NATIONAL University of Cincinnati police officer charged with murder White campus police officer Raymond Tensing faces life in prison for shooting an unarmed black man, Samuel Dubose, during what should have been a routine traffic stop. Tensing was charged with murder on Wednesday, and pleaded not guilty at his arraignment Thursday. Legionnaire’s outbreak in New York City There have been 31 reported cases and two deaths resulting from Legionnaire’s disease in the Bronx in the past three weeks. Legionnaire’s produces flu-like symptoms, and usually comes from plumbing systems. This week, city officials began investigating water cooling towers near the outbreak area. WORLD Taliban leader dies, new successor named On Thursday, Taliban officials confirmed the death of Mullah Mohammad Omar , stating he died of an unspecified illness more than two years ago. Omar’s deputy for the past three years, Mullah Akhtar Mansoor, was named the successor. Boeing 777 debris found An international team of aviation experts is investigating if debris of a plane found on an island in the Indian Ocean belongs to Malaysia Airlines flight 370, which disappeared in March 2014. No other 777 jets are unaccounted for in the world. IN OTHER NEWS National Geographic leftovers Nathan Benn was a National Geographic staff photographer for nearly 20 years, during which the editors always handled picking the money shots. He only saw about 10 percent of the photos he took. Now, he’s compiled some of those rejected pictures in a book, which features some vintage Pittsburgh shots. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.