Posted in Daily report , posts June 5, 2015 by PublicSource contributor June 5, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Study correlates fracking with underweight births A University of Pittsburgh study has found that women living within 10 miles of fracking sites are 34 percent more likely to have underweight babies. Fetuses are more sensitive to environmental pollutants than adults. Pittsburgh: Healthy joint replacement patients could opt for outpatient programs Anaesthesia advancements have reduced recovery times for patients with hip and joint replacements to the point where the Health and Wellness Pavilion in Peters Township is on the cusp of offering outpatient joint replacement surgeries. Pittsburgh: AlphaLab accelerator celebrates local startups AlphaLab , a Pittsburgh-based entrepreneurial accelerator, held its demo day at Stage AE on Tuesday. Fourteen local startups presented, showing a diverse range of local innovation, including personal water filters and fatigue-tracking devices for truck drivers. Pittsburgh: Dollar Bank Three Rivers Arts Festival kicks off today Whether you come for the free music, the festival food or the art , the 10-day Arts Festival extravaganza starts at Point State Park today. Featuring the theme “Unseen/Unheard,” a couple of the public installations address the Point’s history as a killing ground. Philadelphia: Race, class, parenting, education all factors in adult intervention There have been several problematic instances where Philadelphia parents have violently intervened on behalf of their children’s squabbles. Changing demographics and poverty might have something to do with it. Dauphin County: Grand jury finds systemic problems with Children & Youth Services The grand jury investigated how CYS handled the death of a 9-year-old who died of severe maltreatment last year. The jury cited the cut of the Child Protective Services department and poor training of CYS staff as major systemic problems. NATIONAL Jeb Bush and Rick Perry become 10th and 11th GOP campaigners On Thursday morning, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush said his formal announcement would come June 15. Later on Thursday, former Texas Gov. Rick Perry launched his campaign. Push for a more equal distribution of wealth More than half of higher-income Americans agree that wealth should be more evenly distributed, according to a New York Times / CBS News poll. About six in 10 Americans also think the government should do more to reduce the gap between rich and poor. Medicaid gap floods health clinics with patients The expansion of the Affordable Care Act was designed to reduce the number of uninsured patients, but the expansion was optional. Twenty-one states didn’t expand, affecting people who earn too much for Medicaid and too little for other insurance subsidies. IN OTHER NEWS New ‘Hellboy’ dinosaur identified in Alberta, Canada It looks like the familiar triceratops , but it’s not; the Regaliceratops peterhewsi is a different related species. It was nicknamed “Hellboy” because its small horns resemble the comic book character. The daily report was compiled by Stephanie Roman, a PublicSource intern. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at sroman@publicsource.org. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.