Posted in Inside our Newsroom , posts PublicSource receives awards in state contest by swalsh April 28, 2015 December 9, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PublicSource reporters have been recognized for their outstanding work by the Society of Professional Journalists’ Keystone Chapter. Reporter Halle Stockton received a first-place award for her enterprise reporting, revealing that thousands of disabled workers in the state are paid far below minimum wage. Judges praised her ability to go beyond statistics and report on the heart of the matter. Read the story here. The story also brought Stockton a first-place award for enterprise or investigative reporting from the Pennsylvania Women’s Press Association. Stockton recently received a national first-place award from the Society of Professional Journalists for her story about Bob and Tina Norris , a couple with cerebral palsy. Eric Holmberg received a second-place award for a series of stories on campaign finance that used data to look at who was contributing to the gubernatorial campaign in Pennsylvania. Holmberg’s reporting was singled out for its use of excellent data visualization and its powerful results. He also shared an award for his contribution to ‘Price of the Prize,’ along with Alexandra Kanik, PublicSource’s web developer, and two Pittsburgh Post-Gazette staffers. Andrew McGill and Laura Malt Schneiderman of the Post-Gazette collaborated on the web application. All were praised for their creation of a multi-faceted app with extensive geocoding that allowed other news partners to use the data. Jeffrey Benzing received a third-place award for his reporting on the failure of many police departments in the state to fingerprint suspected criminals. Jeff was commended for his ability to explore the justice system’s handling of the critical subject “beautifully and simply.” Benzing was also recognized for his portrait of a heroin addict in recovery. PublicSource reporter Natasha Khan and videographer Molly Duerig were named for their outstanding video on the subject. The Society of Professional Journalists’ awards ceremony will be held on May 30 in Gettysburg at the Pennsylvania News Media Association Press Conference. SPJ promotes the free flow of information vital to a well-informed citizenry; works to inspire and educate the next generation of journalists; and protects First Amendment guarantees of freedom of speech and press. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.