Posted in Inside our Newsroom Inside our Newsroom: Accountability and community by Halle Stockton December 18, 2019 January 7, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Why does PublicSource cover what it covers? We get this question a lot, so we’d like to explain what elements and values we pursue when deciding what to cover. When you look at it holistically, our journalism has two common themes: One is accountability : We ask tough questions on your behalf and seek to share what we learn in a way that empowers the public to act however they see fit. The second is a focus on community : You hear from people in our reported stories and first-person essays who don’t always get asked to share their perspectives and experiences. We inform, explain, amplify and, when appropriate, we hold feet to the fire. Our approach stems from the belief that you deserve to know how your taxpayer money is being spent, how public schools are performing, and what is in the water you drink and the air you breathe. Just as important is our duty to break down echo chambers, so you can hear how fellow Pittsburghers are experiencing life here. Make a donation to PublicSource today. When we evaluate what makes a story, one of the first considerations we have is about how it will benefit and serve you to know about it. We also think about if there is potential for change or reform. While problems tend to divide, we aim to host the most important conversations of the region in a way that brings community together. That’s why we don’t see our job as complete until we’re able to report out what we learn about best practices and models to solve the problems we face. It is serious journalism, but it should not leave you feeling hopeless. ‘Stories for a better Pittsburgh’ is not just a catchy tagline; it is our mantra and our mandate. We recognize though that ‘better’ can look like different things to different people. Our hope is that the journalism we produce spurs the community to come together and find a common vision. To support us in accomplishing that mission, please consider donating today. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton