Posted in Equity , On the beat , posts , PUBLIC SAFETY Law enforcement lacks gender diversity by PublicSource contributor September 14, 2015 January 10, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Women in law enforcement Law enforcement lacks gender diversity Female cops are statistically less likely to discharge their weapons and receive far less complaints than their fellow male officers. Studies have shown that they are better at communication and trust-building and employ those tactics more often than using physical force during an arrest. Despite these qualities, an Al Jazeera Americ a news analysis shows that women still make up only a small percentage of the police force. Law enforcement continues to be considered one of the least diverse public sectors when it comes to gender, with women accounting for about 12 percent of sworn officers. The Al Jazeera piece noted that in the 1990s, Pittsburgh set a national high for gender equality. Its success followed a 1975 settlement between the federal government and the Pittsburgh Bureau of Police that for every male officer recruited, a woman had to be hired. That arrangement shot female employment up to 27 percent — three times the national average then, according to the article. But that number has since dropped to about 17 percent, proving that recruitment of women in the force today has become increasingly difficult. It seems as though efforts have come to a halt. Consent decrees that order measures to increase diversity have been fading, allowing cities to fall into old habits. Even with recruitment, women still face gender issues while on duty. The police and civil liberties reporter for Al Jazeera wrote: Women haven’t found an easy place on U.S. police forces. Female cops face a number of challenges, including sexual harassment and bias from male officers. Meanwhile, barriers to promotion continue to keep qualified female candidates from ascending the ranks to leadership positions where they can effect change. Female recruitment has also taken a backseat to efforts to increase racial diversity. In Pittsburgh, only 13 percent of the city police officers are black, according to the Pittsburgh City Paper . The lack of diversity isn’t just a problem of optics, say many activists and residents: It can lead to less effective policing, and produce mistrust like the kind that has been boiling over in days of protests over the fatal police shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo. Al Jazeera said that in the wake of numerous police brutality cases, “what we need now are more officers who are skilled in tactics that aren’t measured in an obstacle course.” FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Reach Christine Manganas at cmanganas@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Criminal Justice , Employment , Women's rights