Posted in DATA , Education , On the beat , posts The new Pennsylvania teacher salary data by Eric Holmberg January 15, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Teacher at a chalkboard The Pennsylvania Department of Education released salary data for K-12 teachers this week from the 2012-’13 school year. According to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette : The announcement about access to financial data was made at a news conference sponsored by state Rep. Jim Christiana, R-Beaver, who in the past has sponsored legislation calling for the compilation and posting of school financial data. The Department of Education picked up on his idea; compiled the information, which is reported annually to the department; and made it available through a link on the SPP website. The data was added to paschoolperformance.org , which is the education department’s site that hosts demographic and academic performance statistics for schools in the state’s 500 school districts. However, the salary data is not particularly easy to find on the site. So we’ve downloaded it for you here . The spreadsheet contains all the salaries for teachers and staff in every school district, more than 190,000 rows. You will need Microsoft Excel or another spreadsheet program if you’d like to work with the data on your own computer. When you open the file in your spreadsheet program, you can filter the data to find information more quickly. The filter function in Excel is located under the “Data” tab. Once you click filter, arrows will appear next to each column in the first row. If you’re looking for a specific teacher, click on the arrow next to the last name or first name column and type in a name. If you’d like to see the salaries for all the staff members in your school district, click on the arrow next to the “LEA” column, which is the school district, and click the “Select All” box to uncheck all the school districts and then click on the box next to the school district you’d like to see. You can search for or select “Pittsburgh SD,” “Philadelphia City SD,” or the school district of your choice. You can do the same thing if you’d like to see all the salaries for teachers and staff in a specific county. Click on the arrow next to the “LEACounty” column and either select or search for the county you’d like to see. Reach Eric Holmberg at 412-315-0266 or at eholmberg@publicsource.org . Follow him on Twitter @holmberges . FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine.