Posted in Daily report , posts July 27, 2015 by Halle Stockton July 27, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X PENNSYLVANIA Pittsburgh: Scholarship program readjusts The Pittsburgh Promise, which provides tuition money to students with excellent academic and attendance records, recently reduced its maximum support from $40,000 to $30,000. Instead of running out of money by the Class of 2022, the changes will keep the program running until 2028, while they continue efforts to raise more funds. Pittsburgh: Marshall-Shadeland neighborhood violence The North Side community has experienced three shootings in eight days . One man was killed and three other men left with critical gunshot wounds. A woman has been charged with the attempted homicide of two of the men. A pair of teenagers have been arrested on gun charges in the neighborhood, but they have not been connected to the shootings. Erie: Teen shooting deaths A drive-by shooting on Friday night left two Erie teenagers dead and five injured. The first death occurred immediately, and the second boy died Saturday evening. Police are investigating. Hanover: Long-term effects of chemical plant fire The fire last month at the Miller Chemical and Fertilizer Plant contaminated a nearby creek, resulting in thousands of fish dying off and the Conewago Creek being closed to all recreation. State officials are studying the effects and are expected to issue a report in about 30 days. Northeastern Pennsylvania: Pipeline problems Landowners fear their properties will be ruined by the planned pipeline expansion, which is part of the $2.59 billion Atlantic Sunrise project. Statewide: Gambling payouts better than last year Slot machine players in Pennsylvania had better luck in the past year, and the casinos also increased their winnings to $2.34 billion. Statewide: Potential Verizon strike Verizon workers in Pennsylvania and eight other states and Washington, D.C., have voted to go on strike if they can’t come to terms with the company. The contract tiff centers on pensions and health care. NATIONAL GOP tensions Factions of the Republican Party are clashing over if and how to take advantage of its Senate majority to repeal the Affordable Care Act and further increase sanctions against Iran. Obama focuses on social justice issues in Kenya He challenged Kenyan officials on gay rights, called for an end to violence against women and attempted to inspire the country’s youth by emphasizing that he is the first Kenyan-American to be president of the U.S. Justice Department descends on small Maryland city Justice officials are investigating the termination of a black police chief in Pocomoke City. He was fired after refusing to fire two black officers who made allegations of racism within the department. The inquiry has expanded to include irregularities in a city council election and the use of a federal police grant. The role of campus police After a recent deadly shooting in Cincinnati by a university police officer , colleges and universities are evaluating the powers of their campus police departments. IN OTHER NEWS Air conditioning … ‘another big, sexist plot?’ This informal inquiry on how office temperatures affect men and women differently was done in Washington, D.C. but can apply to any office building. See if your male and female colleagues want control over the thermostat. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor The daily report was compiled by Halle Stockton, a PublicSource reporter. You can reach her with questions or suggestions at hstockton@publicsource.org. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle Stockton leads Pittsburgh’s Public Source as editor-in-chief and co-executive director, guiding the newsroom’s strategy to bring trusted, independent journalism closer to the communities it serves.... More by Halle Stockton