Posted in ON INSTAGRAM Watch: How could Pittsburgh media better cover the city’s Black communities? Here are some thoughts from residents. by Ryan Loew and Jordan Snowden February 20, 2020 February 20, 2020 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The Pittsburgh Black Media Panel on Feb. 12, 2020. (Photo by Ryan Loew/PublicSource) On Feb. 12, more than 100 people gathered at the August Wilson African American Cultural Center for a conversation on media coverage of Pittsburgh’s Black communities. The event , hosted by the Pittsburgh City Paper and PublicSource with support from the Pittsburgh Black Media Federation and California University of Pennsylvania, featured two discussions in which panelists detailed their experiences working in the city’s media landscape and covered concerns ranging from media bias to representation in newsrooms. Such topics were recently highlighted in a study by journalist and media scholar Letrell Crittenden , a panelist at the event. We asked some attendees how they would describe the coverage and what local journalists should do differently. ﻿ ﻿ Danielle Walker, 28, of Homewood, wished local media would dig deeper and report more nuanced stories of Pittsburgh’s Black communities. Here’s how Walker described current coverage. * * * ﻿ ﻿ Bloomfield resident Clara Kent, 31, doesn’t see an effort on the part of the local media to get to know Black communities and cover their achievements, which can push people to leave the city. * * * ﻿ ﻿ Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Lynn Rubenson, 67, of North Point Breeze, said local media coverage of Pittsburgh’s Black communities has “gotten a little better,” but that there hasn’t been enough coverage of racism — which has become more openly expressed in recent years, particularly in comments on social media sites such as Facebook. * * * ﻿ ﻿ James Hough, 45, of Garfield, said coverage would improve if people, particularly the members of Pittsburgh’s Black communities, developed the next generation of journalists and media institutions. * * * ﻿ ﻿ North Braddock resident Jaraya Johnson, 25, said it’s often easy for the media to focus on negative stories. Johnson would like journalists to spend more time getting to know Black communities and share positive stories as well. * * * Ryan Loew of PublicSource can be reached at ryan@publicsource.org . Jordan Snowden of Pittsburgh City Paper can be reached at jsnowden@pghcitypaper.com . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: On Instagram