Posted in Environment , On the beat , posts The Friday derailment roundup by Natasha Khan October 23, 2015 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X Derailment after derailment. They just keep happening. Since early February, there have been numerous derailments in North America carrying crude from North Dakota’s Bakken Shale. These accidents have sparked increased calls from citizens, the rail industry and lawmakers for the federal government to increase safety regulations . To keep up with these incidents and new safety regulations, PublicSource provides a roundup of stories every Friday. Spill plans could be kept secret Tucked inside a larger U.S. House of Representatives transportation bill is a small section that could result in shielding the public from knowing how prepared railroads are for responding to oil train crashes and railroads’ worst-case scenario estimates. Nurses stage “die in” at New York train station Hundreds of nurses from a New York nurses association took over the Saratoga Springs Amtrak Station to protest so called “bomb trains,” or trains carrying crude oil, chugging through communities. The nurses called for greater safety precautions and said oil trains are a major public health threat. Minnesota governor worried about oil trains Minnesota Gov. Mark Dayton wrote a letter to BNSF Railway, one of the state’s major crude oil haulers, about an oil train route that had not been previously identified as such by the railroad. The governor said the new route puts an additional 99,000 people at risk in Minnesota and requested the rail company take additional safety measures. Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source interns discuss how to cope when news is ‘making you go crazy’ FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Huge crude-by-rail facility pegged for West Coast Even amid low oil prices Tesoro wants to develop a 42-acre site at Washington’s Port of Vancouver that would receive 360,000 barrels of domestic crude per day. If approved, it would be one of the biggest crude-by-rail facilities in the country. Reach Natasha Khan at nkhan@publicsource.org . Follow her on Twitter @ khantasha . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Energy Natasha Khan nkhan@publicsource.org x Natasha is creative director at Pittsburgh's Public Source. She runs the organization's visuals team and audience team. She manages the website and works with Public Source's team of reporters, editors,... More by Natasha Khan