Posted in DATA , Heroin: Riding the Rush , Local Government How Pennsylvania responded to rising drug deaths from heroin and opioid overdoses with stagnant funds by Jeffrey Benzing June 1, 2016 January 9, 2017 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X In Pennsylvania, the office that screens mail for officials in Harrisburg gets more money than the whole operating budget for the agency fighting the heroin crisis. More goes to tourism marketing. And to capital printing and expenses. In fact, as overdoses swelled, state lawmakers in 2010 voted to create a new Department of Drug and Alcohol Programs [DDAP], elevating it from a humble bureau, and then made it the department with the smallest operations budget in the commonwealth, according to state financial documents. They also failed to fully restore funding to local drug treatment, which has been cut in several recent budgets. That means fewer resources amid a worsening crisis and shortages of detox beds and slots for long-term drug treatment. “We’re in an absolute emergency,” said Deb Beck, president of the Drug and Alcohol Service Providers Organization of Pennsylvania, an advocacy group for treatment providers. Gary Tennis, secretary of DDAP, said funds dropped at both the state and federal level as we descended into the worst overdose epidemic “in the history of humanity.” His department remains understaffed, as PublicSource documented more than a year ago. Its current funding of $1.87 million is an increase, but it remains low compared to roughly $30 billion in other general fund spending. The state estimates that the collateral costs of drug addiction costs taxpayers $5.3 billion each year, including costs to law enforcement, education, health care and human services. Below is our illustration of the expensive and deadly crisis and the state’s stagnant response. FIRST PERSON Practicing psychiatry left me suicidal. Converting my pickup into an off-roader let me explore the world — and recover mine. Education What is your school’s AI policy? Education Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Inside our Newsroom Pittsburgh’s Public Source wins national award for impactful democracy-focused reporting Local Government Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Gainey’s budget proposal would leave smaller mayor’s office for his successor Routes spared, but upgrades nixed in Pittsburgh Regional Transit funding fix Academic freedom is under attack. How have Pittsburgh higher ed leaders responded? Teachers learning to use — not fear — AI Tagged: Data