Posted in Pittsburgh at Work The pandemic, new tech and more have upended work. How has your approach to work in Pittsburgh changed over the past 5 years? Think back on 2020, when a global pandemic forced many people to trade a rush hour commute for remembering to unmute. Tell PublicSource how similar or different your work circumstances are today. by PublicSource February 17, 2025 February 14, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X (Photo illustration by Natasha Vicens/PublicSoure) PublicSource, with Technical.ly, is exploring the landscape of work in Pittsburgh — famed for its industriousness and intense union-management conflict and collaboration — as it is pressure-tested by changes in governmental policy, technology and economics. It’s 2019, and you’re stuck in rush hour traffic on the way back from your job — maybe from an office, a hospital, a factory, a job site or a classroom. You ate lunch with coworkers or grabbed something between shifts. You made child care arrangements until you or someone else could pick up your littles after work. This — or something similar — was your daily routine. Click here to fill out a brief form. Five years later, much has changed. The COVID-19 pandemic was a major force in reshaping work, but it wasn’t the only one. Technological advancements, labor movements, shifting workforce demands and economic pressures have all played roles in transforming the way people work across industries. For some, remote and hybrid work became the norm. Others saw their jobs become even more demanding in person, from health care workers to warehouse employees to service industry staff. Some changed careers entirely. Wages, working conditions and job expectations have been contested, renegotiated and, in some cases, redefined. As we mark five years since early 2020, we want to hear from you. If you were working then, how has your work changed, if at all? What’s better or worse about work now compared to before? We are local reporters who tell local stories. Subscribe now to our free newsletter to get important Pittsburgh stories sent to your inbox three times a week. Sign up We also recognize that not everyone is working — some have retired, some are still searching for stable employment and others have left the workforce for different reasons. We still want to hear from you. Share your story below, let us know who you are for verification, and we may publish yours alongside others. Name (Required) Age Your location, neighborhood or municipality (Required) What’s your occupation or current work situation? Please feel free to include multiple jobs or if you’re self-employed, between jobs, retired or not working for other reasons. (Required) Tell us how similar or different your work circumstances are today from January 2020 (aka pre-pandemic times). (Required) Tell us what's better and worse about work now. (Required) Email (It’d be great to be able to contact you, but sharing your email is optional.) Δ HEALTH Death of an ‘elder orphan’ warns that aging alone may become more dangerous Trump Impacts Pittsburgh leaders try to coordinate response to Trump budget cuts, seeing ‘long haul’ challenges Inside our Newsroom PublicSource stories on overdoses, jail program win Vann awards ENVIRONMENT Fearing radioactive waste, Grove City community fights to stop landfill reopening ECONOMY & HOUSING Gainey has 7 months and 7 major development priorities. Here’s where they stand. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ PUBLICSOURCE STORIES See what Allegheny County employees earned in 2024 — and how the county is hiding names of many top earners Gainey has 7 months and 7 major development priorities. Here’s where they stand. Death of an 'elder orphan' warns that aging alone may become more dangerous Trump talks up U.S. Steel deal in Mon Valley as Pittsburgh-area towns laud jobs, await details on upgrades Tagged: Allegheny County , callout , labor , leadstorynoshow , Pennsylvania , Pittsburgh