Posted in Trump Impacts As the Trump administration changes America, we want to know how it’s affecting Pittsburghers If policy shifts coming out of Washington, D.C., have altered your life, please consider sharing that with the team at PublicSource. by PublicSource January 27, 2025 January 27, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The beginning of President Donald Trump’s second term has been called “ dizzying ” in relation to the number of substantial changes to U.S. policies and norms. The effects are already reaching Pittsburgh . Fill out our brief form PublicSource has always covered the effects of federal government policies on Southwestern Pennsylvania. With the rapid shifts in so many areas of federal involvement, we’re asking our audience to help us to understand the ramifications for the Pittsburgh area. As you experience or observe changes in our communities, please consider letting us know with this brief form. We will not identify you in relation to the information you provide without your consent. If you know something and want to contact us securely, use these options . What effects of changing federal policies are you experiencing or observing? If you observed a specific act or situation driven by changing federal policies, where and when did it occur? If you are willing to talk with a reporter about what you experienced or observed, how can we best reach you? Δ We are local reporters who tell local stories. Subscribe now to our free newsletter to get important Pittsburgh stories sent to your inbox three times a week. Sign up HEALTH Death of an ‘elder orphan’ warns that aging alone may become more dangerous Trump Impacts Pittsburgh leaders try to coordinate response to Trump budget cuts, seeing ‘long haul’ challenges Inside our Newsroom PublicSource stories on overdoses, jail program win Vann awards ENVIRONMENT Fearing radioactive waste, Grove City community fights to stop landfill reopening ECONOMY & HOUSING Gainey has 7 months and 7 major development priorities. Here’s where they stand. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ PUBLICSOURCE STORIES See what Allegheny County employees earned in 2024 — and how the county is hiding names of many top earners Gainey has 7 months and 7 major development priorities. Here’s where they stand. Death of an 'elder orphan' warns that aging alone may become more dangerous Trump talks up U.S. Steel deal in Mon Valley as Pittsburgh-area towns laud jobs, await details on upgrades Tagged: leadstorynoshow