Posted in Inside our Newsroom PublicSource internships have prepared over 100 aspiring journalists and supporters of public-service reporting For more than a decade, Pittsburgh’s PublicSource has helped emerging journalists and those who value deep, independent journalism to develop skills, earn recognition and launch their careers. by Jennie Liska and Halle Stockton March 5, 2025 March 9, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X From left, Bella Markovitz, editorial intern, talks with Jamie Wiggan, deputy editor, and fellow interns Jake Vasilias and Anastasia Busby at the PublicSource newsroom in Uptown, Tuesday, Jan. 28, 2025. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) “I have new insight into what a story can be.” “I was able to connect with people in the community and learn some of the ins and outs of how the city and county government works.” “I really exceeded my expectations in terms of what I was able to produce.” These reflections from past PublicSource interns are testimony to why internships have long been core to our organization’s spirit and mission. For more than 10 years, the PublicSource team has been imparting innovative and inclusive methods of storytelling to aspiring journalists across specialties. We’ve hosted reporters, data journalism novices, photojournalists, and interns specializing in audience engagement or business partnerships. In the fall, we reached a significant milestone: We have trained over 100 interns in the PublicSource newsroom. We are local reporters who tell local stories. Subscribe now to our free newsletter to get important Pittsburgh stories sent to your inbox three times a week. Sign up This achievement reflects our commitment to both high-quality journalism and fostering the next generation of journalists and professionals supporting journalism in an evolving media landscape. In 2025, our interns continue to accomplish great things during and after their time with PublicSource — producing impactful reporting, winning awards and moving on to impressive careers. A PublicSource internship can take many forms. Our editorial interns often fully report enterprise stories with data or investigative elements and learn our intensive fact-checking system. Our photojournalism interns take assignments just like our staff photojournalists while also being encouraged to pitch their own ideas. Other internship roles have focused on building our newsroom’s tech and data access, growing our presence on social media or even building relationships with local businesses. HEALTH Death of an ‘elder orphan’ warns that aging alone may become more dangerous Trump Impacts Pittsburgh leaders try to coordinate response to Trump budget cuts, seeing ‘long haul’ challenges Inside our Newsroom PublicSource stories on overdoses, jail program win Vann awards ENVIRONMENT Fearing radioactive waste, Grove City community fights to stop landfill reopening ECONOMY & HOUSING Gainey has 7 months and 7 major development priorities. Here’s where they stand. Our interns have been honored for their work. Last year, interns Elizabeth Szeto and Tanya Babbar both won Press Club of Western PA Golden Quill awards. Babbar, who collaborated with PublicSource’s health reporter on the award-winning investigation and is now a reporter at the Houston Chronicle, said she appreciated working closely with the reporters and editors at PublicSource. “That was very reassuring,” she said. Each PublicSource intern is assigned a staff member who can provide deep mentoring and interns are also invited to our weekly staff meetings and professional development sessions. Evans Toviave, who interned with PublicSource in audience engagement last year, brought creativity to crafting social media copy, producing reels and deepening audience connections. “Working with PublicSource was a dream come true because it allowed me to take something I had always been passionate about and turn it from an extracurricular pursuit into real-world experience with the potential to impact lives across the Pittsburgh region,” he said. “One of the things I love most is that the journey doesn’t end — I am forever grateful to have a team of mentors I can always turn to for career advice and guidance from fellow journalists.” We see PublicSource interns moving on to a variety of important roles beyond our news organization. In journalism, they’ve gone on to institutions like The New York Times, CNN, Trib Total Media, the Houston Chronicle and Bloomberg News, among many others. And, some of our interns choose career paths outside of journalism in public service, nonprofit, marketing or technology roles. Wherever they land, we see PublicSource interns doing work that is informed by the time they spend in our newsroom. “I was able to learn and grow as a reporter and get an even better understanding of what it truly means to be part of a news organization that prioritizes public-service reporting,” said Danielle Cruz, who interned with PublicSource in 2021 and now serves as managing editor of the Co-op City Times. Amanda Su interned with PublicSource in fall 2020, and said the lessons gained were something she would carry through her career. “PublicSource’s focus on enterprising reporting and public-service journalism — what drew me to this internship — challenged me to research deeply and source widely, and to pursue novel, community-centered angles for news threads with a sense of urgency,” said Su, who went on to work for ABC News before joining New York Times Opinion as an associate video producer. We are proud of the difference that these more than 100 interns are making in our world and look forward to welcoming the next round of interns to our newsroom. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ PUBLICSOURCE STORIES See what Allegheny County employees earned in 2024 — and how the county is hiding names of many top earners Gainey has 7 months and 7 major development priorities. Here’s where they stand. Death of an 'elder orphan' warns that aging alone may become more dangerous Trump talks up U.S. Steel deal in Mon Valley as Pittsburgh-area towns laud jobs, await details on upgrades Jennie Liska jennie@publicsource.org Jennie is co-executive director of revenue and operations. She oversees revenue generation and relationship development to support the growth of PublicSource and manages internal business operations. Before... More by Jennie Liska Halle Stockton halle@publicsource.org x Halle is co-executive director and editor-in-chief of PublicSource. She served as managing editor for seven years prior to her current role. Halle was a reporter for PublicSource for three years and for... More by Halle Stockton