Posted in Economy & Housing The design of Pittsburgh’s future will be about trust, say two local architects As it sheds its industrial past and embraces its tech-focused future, Pittsburgh today represents a “liminal space.” Climate migration and other coming changes could bring new changes to the city’s built environment. by Melanie Linn Gutowski March 5, 2025 March 9, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The skyline along the Oakland Innovation District with buildings from the University of Pittsburgh’s Oakland campus and UPMC hospitals and research facilities, as photographed on Wednesday, Feb. 26, 2025. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) This story was originally published by NEXTpittsburgh , a news partner of PublicSource. NEXTpittsburgh features the people, projects and places advancing the region and the innovative and cool things happening here. Sign up to get their free newsletter. Pittsburghers are famous (infamous?) for constantly referring to places — landmarks, companies, buildings — that aren’t there anymore. We have a keen collective memory of what has come and gone in our built environment – but what about what comes next? That’s a question husband-and-wife team Bea Spolidoro and Eric Fisher, principal architects at Fisher ARCHitecture , set out to address late last month. On a recent wintry evening in the historic Allegheny Harvard-Yale-Princeton Club in Downtown Pittsburgh — a three-story miniature bit of Cambridge, Massachusetts, tucked in amongst the city’s towering odes to its metallurgical past — a group of about 80 people gathered to hear Spolidoro and Fisher’s thoughts. The couple outlined what they call “an architecture of trust.” According to Fisher, this means that “architects’ designs must foster connections between people, place and purpose. Built projects must become visual representations of their designers’ integrity and credibility.” Spolidoro, a native of Milan, Italy, said, “fundamentally, Pittsburgh is a European city.” She pointed to the extirpation of Indigenous peoples by the French and British, and the eventual waves of European immigration as all having left their mark on the city’s structure. The River House, an adaptive reuse project along Butler Street in Morningside, connects both the river below and the street above on a hillside building site. (Photo courtesy of Fisher ARCHitecture) We are local reporters who tell local stories. Subscribe now to our free newsletter to get important Pittsburgh stories from Public Source sent to your inbox three times a week. Sign up However, despite its centuries of European influence, the city lacks something many European cities can boast: “a stronger emphasis on historical context, intricate craftsmanship, attention to detail and integration with the surrounding environment than the United States,” Spolidoro said. “As well, there is a greater focus [in Europe] on preserving older buildings. The result is often a more visually appealing and culturally rich cityscape.” Fisher points to a unique factor in Pittsburgh’s favor: environmental stability. “Pittsburgh is likely to be much better off than many other cities as climate change devastates the globe over the coming decades,” he said. “Pittsburgh is far from the hurricanes, floods, earthquakes and droughts that are wreaking havoc elsewhere.” The displacement brought on by climate change, while leading to increased pressure on the city’s housing and infrastructure, “will also create new opportunities for economic growth and innovation, with a greater emphasis on sustainability and environmental responsibility,” according to Fisher. He highlighted a statistic from the World Bank and the United Nations: “by 2050, cities will be home to an additional 2.5 billion people , with two out of every three people living in urban areas.” Eric Fisher, right, and Bea Spolidoro, speaking at the podium, presented their lecture, “The Future of Pittsburgh Architecture” at the Allegheny Harvard-Yale-Princeton Club on Jan. 29. (Photo by Melanie Linn Gutowski/NEXTPittsburgh) Fisher and Spolidoro both acknowledged the role architects have in meeting the community’s needs when shaping the future of Pittsburgh’s neighborhoods – especially those surrounding the affordable housing crisis, rising energy costs and climate change. PUBLIC SAFETY Fatal explosions are big news, but construction, transportation jobs are now bigger killers HIGHER EDUCATION Pitt Palestine club can resume activities, judge rules Education PPS graduate and Somali Bantu leader sees echoes of Schenley closure in latest school changes Pennsylvania Court orders Pennsylvania to stop throwing out mail ballots over the handwritten date Climate As extreme weather worsens in Pittsburgh area, ‘Superman isn’t showing up’ “Architects bear profound responsibility for ensuring that these plans respond organically from the bottom up to address citizens’ direct needs and concerns,” Fisher said. “They are the ones who will determine the way Pittsburgh will look in the future because they are the ones who will draw every line of the drawings that will be translated into tomorrow’s forms.” Spolidoro points to the changing identity of the city that, in turn, affects the types of buildings that are being built. “Today, Pittsburgh is a liminal place: Pittsburgh occupies a space in its ‘uncanny valley’ that feels in between its industrial past and its rapidly developing, tech-focused future,” she said. “Elements of both eras are visibly present, creating a unique blend of old and new. This juxtaposition can evoke either feelings of sadness, nostalgia and unease, or their opposite, generating feelings of comfort and resolution, depending on where you look.” Bakery Square and East Liberty are areas of the city most often cited as gentrified. New builds and tech hubs, such as Google’s offices, are surrounded by older homes and buildings in nearby Larimer. (Photo by Alexis Wary/NEXTPittsburgh) Gentrification of older, tight-knit working class neighborhoods such as Lawrenceville, Bloomfield and the South Side, bear this liminality out. One of Fisher ARCHitecture’s own projects is a microcosm of the push and pull between old and new: the Emerald Art Glass House mixes the use of the company’s existing 20th-century warehouse building with a contemporary residence cantilevered over it, responding to both the wishes of the client and the character of the neighborhood. Spolidoro and Fisher called for a more thoughtful design process to help Pittsburgh avoid the “cut-and-paste” look of boxy, midsize residential buildings that has plagued cities such as Seattle and Denver. The couple points to the city’s Comprehensive Planning Process document, which states “Before we look to the future, we need to acknowledge our past, from the legacy of heavy industry to the heavy-handed government policies that disrupted neighborhoods and displaced residents and contributed to the degradation of the region’s air, soil and water.” In addition to architectural design challenges, transportation is another major challenge for Pittsburgh, said Fisher. “I personally think that automobiles will be far less prominent 15 years from now than they are now,” Fisher said. A Shadyside native, he has what seems to be a lifelong desire for a more human-centric approach to transportation. “I’ve been dreaming of making [Walnut Street] a pedestrian promenade since I was 5 years old growing up in the neighborhood,” he told the crowd. In the end, the “architecture of trust” isn’t about steel and glass but about people and their relationship to places. “Change begins with trust — trust in new ideas, trust in collaborative processes and trust in the transformative power of architecture,” Spolidoro said. “Architects’ ability to achieve the public’s trust in the future will be dependent on their ability to create quality work. Then, they will be able to more effectively educate and empower the public to envision alternative futures.” Melanie Linn Gutowski is a freelance writer and conservation educator and can be reached at melanielinngutowski@gmail.com . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Panther Hollow was once envisioned as a roofed ‘Valley of Tomorrow’ As extreme weather worsens in Pittsburgh area, ‘Superman isn’t showing up’ PPS graduate and Somali Bantu leader sees echoes of Schenley closure in latest school changes Pitt Palestine club can resume activities, judge rules Tagged: leadstorynoshow