Posted in Trump Impacts As the Trump administration changes America, we want to know how it’s affecting Pittsburghers If policy shifts coming out of Washington, D.C., have altered your life, please consider sharing that with the team at PublicSource. by Public Source January 27, 2025 January 27, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X The beginning of President Donald Trump’s second term has been called “ dizzying ” in relation to the number of substantial changes to U.S. policies and norms. The effects are already reaching Pittsburgh . Fill out our brief form PublicSource has always covered the effects of federal government policies on Southwestern Pennsylvania. With the rapid shifts in so many areas of federal involvement, we’re asking our audience to help us to understand the ramifications for the Pittsburgh area. As you experience or observe changes in our communities, please consider letting us know with this brief form. We will not identify you in relation to the information you provide without your consent. If you know something and want to contact us securely, use these options . What effects of changing federal policies are you experiencing or observing? If you observed a specific act or situation driven by changing federal policies, where and when did it occur? If you are willing to talk with a reporter about what you experienced or observed, how can we best reach you? Δ We are local reporters who tell local stories. Subscribe now to our free newsletter to get important Pittsburgh stories from Public Source sent to your inbox three times a week. Sign up PUBLIC SAFETY Fatal explosions are big news, but construction, transportation jobs are now bigger killers HIGHER EDUCATION Pitt Palestine club can resume activities, judge rules Education PPS graduate and Somali Bantu leader sees echoes of Schenley closure in latest school changes Pennsylvania Court orders Pennsylvania to stop throwing out mail ballots over the handwritten date Climate As extreme weather worsens in Pittsburgh area, ‘Superman isn’t showing up’ Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Panther Hollow was once envisioned as a roofed ‘Valley of Tomorrow’ As extreme weather worsens in Pittsburgh area, ‘Superman isn’t showing up’ PPS graduate and Somali Bantu leader sees echoes of Schenley closure in latest school changes Pitt Palestine club can resume activities, judge rules Tagged: leadstorynoshow