Posted in Inside our Newsroom The eternal controversy — is Pittsburgh in the East or Midwest? — does not divide PublicSource interns Sure, Pittsburgh is closer to New York than to Chicago. But what does the Steel City’s vibe say about its regional character? PublicSource’s interns bring a spectrum of perspectives. by Jamie Wiggan February 5, 2025 February 5, 2025 Share this: Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Click to share on X (Opens in new window) X From left, PublicSource spring 2025 interns Bella Markovitz, Anastasia Busby and Jake Vasilias at the PublicSource newsroom in Uptown, Tuesday, Jan. 28, 2025. (Photos by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) A new crop of interns have signed up to help PublicSource tell stories for a better Pittsburgh as we enter a new year and a new presidential administration that’s already roiling local communities. While they’re eager to dive into civic affairs, equity and accountability, our introductory conversation took a detour into a less weighty — yet equally contentious — debate among journalists, officials and neighbors alike: Is Pittsburgh Midwestern? Chicago native Jake Vasilias says it is. “As someone who is Midwestern, I get the same aura or vibes in Pittsburgh,” he said, adding that from his experience the people from both Chicago and Pittsburgh tend to be “down-to-earth” and “hardworking.” Midwest 1, East 0 Jake, a PublicSource editorial intern, arrived in Pittsburgh in 2021 after a campus visit the prior year that left him smitten with Oakland and its environs. Jake Vasilias, a PublicSource editorial intern, at the organization’s Uptown newsroom on Jan. 28. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) He enrolled at the University of Pittsburgh with plans to pursue business but, tugged by his conscience, he began contributing to The Pitt News and switched majors to professional writing. “I didn’t want to just sit on a cash cow and insulate myself from the world,” he said. “I want to make a difference.” Jake hopes his time at PublicSource will build his environmental reporting portfolio and prepare him for a news gig either in Pittsburgh or Chicago. Anastasia Busby was raised on the West Coast and then spent four years smack in the middle of the country studying photojournalism at the University of Missouri. Our returning photography intern took another eastbound step when she arrived here last summer, but she suspects there’s a meaningful cultural frontier separating Pittsburgh and the East Coast proper. “It reminds me of the Midwest a lot. … But it doesn’t really look like the Midwest,” Anastasia said. “I was amazed by the number of trees and hills.” Midwest 2, East 0 Anastasia Busby, a PublicSource photojournalism intern, at the organization’s Uptown newsroom, Tuesday, Feb. 4, 2025. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) After familiarizing herself with many of Pittsburgh’s 90 neighborhoods last semester, Anastasia is excited to go deeper while employing her camera as an instrument of community storytelling. Like Jake, she was drawn to journalism by a desire to bring change. “I love photojournalism and journalism because I get to help make some sort of a difference and also scratch this itch of curiosity I have about all these different professions, and be introduced to all kinds of people and walks of life .” As a native Pittsburgher, Editorial Intern Bella Markovitz isn’t bucking the Midwest consensus. “I’ve been to New York City and I’ve been to Philadelphia — that’s my East Coast,” she said. Pittsburgh, on the other hand, has strong “working class” associations that, in Bella’s view, give it a more Midwestern flavor. Final: Midwest 3, East 0 Bella Markovitz, a PublicSource editorial intern, at the organization’s Uptown newsroom, Tuesday, Jan. 28, 2025. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource) Since graduating Pitt last year with a degree in English writing and a certificate in public and professional writing, Bella has carved out a place in the local journalism scene, freelancing for TribLive and other outlets. A lifelong reader and writer, Bella switched majors from political science after a couple of journalism classes and a Pitt News internship pointed to a career path that would reward her love for “snooping.” “I’m nebby,” she said. “I’m into the investigative.” The shakiness of the local news economy only adds to Bella’s desire to forge a path there as she looks beyond her internship. “There are powerful people who don’t want you to know what’s going on,” Bella said. “So that adds to the need to be doing it.” Jamie Wiggan is deputy editor at PublicSource and can be reached at jamie@publicsource.org . Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ STORIES Panther Hollow was once envisioned as a roofed ‘Valley of Tomorrow’ As extreme weather worsens in Pittsburgh area, ‘Superman isn’t showing up’ PPS graduate and Somali Bantu leader sees echoes of Schenley closure in latest school changes Pitt Palestine club can resume activities, judge rules Tagged: interns , internships , leadstorynoshow , Pittsburgh Jamie Wiggan jamie@publicsource.org Jamie began his journalism career at a local news startup in McKees Rocks, where he learned the trade covering local school boards and municipalities, and left four years later as editor-in-chief. He comes... More by Jamie Wiggan