Pittsburgh voters will elect a mayor this year, ultimately choosing from among four major party candidates and deciding whether Democrat Ed Gainey will serve a second term. More than a third of Allegheny County Council seats are on the ballot this year, along with five of nine Pittsburgh Public Schools board seats and four of nine Pittsburgh City Council seats.

Voters registered as Democrats and Republicans will go to the polls May 20 for primary elections to choose nominees for the Nov. 4 General Election. Independent and minor party candidates have until Aug. 1 to file to be on the November ballot.

Allegheny County voters will also choose eight new judges for the Court of Common Pleas and decide whether seven sitting judges keep their jobs. Voters will also decide whether or not to retain two appeals court judges and three state Supreme Court justices, with the potential to shift the ideological leaning of the high court.

Candidates may still be removed from the ballot if their petitions are successfully challenged in court. The lists below will be updated as new information becomes available.

Charlie Wolfson is PublicSource’s local government reporter. He can be reached at charlie@publicsource.org.

Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation.



We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more.



Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW

Republish This Story Republish our articles for free, online or in print, under a Creative Commons license.