Citywide inclusionary zoning won an important endorsement from the City Planning Commission early Wednesday morning after the panel narrowly opposed a competing plan that would be less comprehensive in requiring affordable housing.

With the packed hearing with an estimated 100 public speakers and two votes, debates in Pittsburgh to institutionalize affordable housing reached a new pitch of tension.

“Everybody in this room is frustrated for very, very important reasons,” said Connor Hayes of Lawrenceville during the 11-plus-hour commission meeting to consider Mayor Ed Gainey’s inclusionary zoning proposal and Councilor Bob Charland’s competing version. Hayes argued that city officials should slow down when considering the competing zoning proposals. “This could have the same harmful effect as running highways through Black and brown communities in Pittsburgh. We should make sure we’re doing this correctly.”

And take their time they did as the nine-member panel heard from scores of residents, government officials and academics from across the country on proposals to rewrite the city’s zoning codes to spur more affordable housing. Gainey now looks to expand inclusionary zoning to the rest of the city while Charland’s version would reduce the affordability mandate and allow neighborhoods to opt in.

The city’s current inclusionary zoning requires all new developments with 20 units or more to set aside at least 10% of units for lower-income residents at affordable rates. It applies only in Bloomfield, Lawrenceville, Oakland and Polish Hill. Critics of the zoning overlay argue that it depresses new development and scares away developers. Supporters argue that an expansion is the most effective way to guarantee that Pittsburgh can provide “deeply affordable” housing for lower income families making less than half of the area’s median income.

Activists, community members, city planners and politicians were on hand as two hotly debated inclusionary zoning bills came before a packed meeting of Pittsburgh’s City Planning Commission, Tuesday, Jan. 28, 2025, in Downtown. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource)

“I don’t want us to have a city where some people feel like they’ve been left behind, where some people feel they’ve been left out,” Gainey said around 8:45 p.m., when his proposals finally came up for discussion as the meeting approached the seven-hour mark. “It’s up to us to be able to provide that type of housing for everyone that lives in this city.”

Gainey’s package of zoning proposals also includes allowing accessory dwellings units, eliminating minimum lot sizes and removing the mandate to include parking with new construction. Many of the public commenters noted their approval for these other proposals while calling inclusionary zoning a “poison pill.”

Nonetheless, the commission voted eight to zero with one abstention for Gainey’s proposals. That came after the commission issued a negative recommendation on Charland’s bill, with one member voting against the negative recommendation and three abstaining.

Not new, but controversial

Inclusionary zoning is hardly new, with more than 800 American cities adopting inclusionary housing policies since the 1970s in an attempt to create more affordable housing, according to the National League of Cities. But in Pittsburgh, the concept is relatively novel with a 2019 pilot program introducing the zoning overlay to Lawrenceville before expanding to three other neighborhoods.

People wait in a long line of speakers to get their chance to share thoughts on Pittsburgh City Councilor Bob Charland’s inclusionary zoning bill during a packed meeting of the City Planning Commission, Tuesday, Jan. 28, 2025, in Downtown. Pictured from left waiting to talk are activist Mel Packer; Tony Moreno, Republican mayoral candidate; and Tim Stevens, chairman and CEO The Black Political Empowerment Project. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource)

The tone of Tuesday’s marathon meeting was set early on when Corey Layman, the city’s zoning administrator, was booed by one resident, Carmen Brown, who suggested he be jailed.

Brushing off the comment, Layman presented Charland’s bill, laying out that both Charland and Gainey’s versions “agree on the premise that the private market alone will not provide housing needs but they differ on methods to achieve for greatest need.”

Layman noted that the Department of City Planning met with councilors Charland and Erika Strassburger on two occasions this month to discuss a possible compromise between the two competing bills. Ultimately, the differences between the two bills couldn’t be reconciled and Layman concluded that, “Charland’s bill does not equitably distribute affordable housing throughout city.”

Charland presented his plans to the commissioners, arguing, “my proposal is different. It’s enhanced and shares the cost of building affordable units. It’s modeled after reform policies that look like the mayor’s proposals after they were reformed.”

The two sides have plenty of supporters and detractors, each with statistics and studies to back up their arguments.

“We should not pretend that inclusionary zoning will radically or meaningfully change overall affordability in a city,” said Shane Phillips, a researcher with the UCLA Lewis Center for Regional Policy Studies, who Charland invited to speak. “That's not a knock on inclusionary zoning, you can say that about almost any program. There is not one solution to the housing crisis. The limits of inclusionary zoning are pretty narrow just based on how much housing gets produced a year and how little a share can be set aside without making projects impossible to build.”

As Phillips began to expound on studies in Helsinki and increasing costs in land value, commission Chair LaShawn Burton-Faulk asked him to limit his presentation to Pittsburgh.

“The challenge here is, what he's presenting here is data that may not apply locally,” Burton- Faulk said, with many in the crowd applauding. “I want to be respectful but it's a little unfair to ask everybody to sit through a hundred slides.”

Charland responded, “it's unfair to make a ruling on zoning legislation without full context of what we're looking at.” Pittsburgh City Councilor Anthony Coghill, left, shakes the hand of Councilor Bob Charland after voicing his support for Charland’s inclusionary zoning bill during a meeting of the City Planning Commission, Tuesday, Jan. 28, 2025, in Downtown. Coghill supported the bill’s stipulation that each city neighborhood could decide for itself whether to apply inclusionary zoning rules. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource)

Charland asked the commission to allow Jack Billings, a Squirrel Hill native with Pro-Housing Pittsburgh, to present but Burton-Faulk denied the request. The exchange led to accusations throughout the meeting that the commissioners were censoring Charland’s bill and arguments. David Vatz, also with Pro-Housing Pittsburgh, took it a step further and accused the commission of being “a kangaroo court.”

After Charland’s presentation, a large number of people formed a line to voice their thoughts on Charland’s bill.

“Pittsburgh needs a strong inclusionary zoning policy that would require developers to create units for all,” said Alisia Grisham of Uptown. “Charland’s bill is a mockery of what inclusionary zoning should be.”

City Controller Rachael Heisler said that after studying the issue she concluded that there isn’t enough data to come to any conclusions about inclusionary zoning. She cautioned against using any available data on the city’s pilot inclusionary zoning program to come to a conclusion on the topic.

“Our initial work suggests there isn't a large enough sample size presently available to reach a clear conclusion about inclusionary zoning's local efficacy,” Heisler wrote in a memo to the City Planning Commission.

Casandra Armour of City of Bridges Community Land Trust listens during a packed meeting of the City Planning Commission, Tuesday, Jan. 28, 2025, in downtown Pittsburgh. A variety of housing groups were present, spilling into the space outside the meeting room as people debated the issues. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource)

Heisler’s forthcoming report identifies Pittsburgh’s decades of disinvestment and population loss as “a core driver of the unreliability of this data.”

Heisler continued “Our baseline of housing construction is low, which makes the sample size too small to make a legitimate analysis. While new unit construction has accelerated in the past decade, particularly in high-demand neighborhoods like Lawrenceville and the Strip District, we remain outpaced by peer cities overall.”

Heisler’s office will continue to work with the planning department to complete their report.

“Like all parties involved in this discussion, we believe the City must work collaboratively to foster robust housing development that not only supports and protects our current population but also future growth,” Heisler wrote.

Questions of legality and a coming council vote

Words of caution also came from development interests. Bakery Square’s developer, Walnut Capital, issued a letter to city planners through lawyer Jonathan Kamin, a familiar face at city planning meetings.

Kamin urged commissioners to consider the legal entanglement around inclusionary zoning. Commissioner Mel Ngami responds to Pittsburgh City Councilor Bob Charland as he presents his inclusionary zoning bill during a packed meeting of the City Planning Commission, Tuesday, Jan. 28, 2025, in Downtown. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource)

“The legality of the City’s current IZ is currently subject to challenge in federal court, and has been litigated for more than two years,” Kamin wrote, citing the ongoing case of Builders Association of Metropolitan Pittsburgh v. City of Pittsburgh.

The bills now go to Pittsburgh City Council for final votes.

Because Gainey’s proposal won a positive recommendation, it only needs five votes on the nine-member council to pass. Charland’s bill, carrying a negative recommendation, needs seven votes on council to go to the mayor for signature or veto.

Eric Jankiewicz is PublicSource’s economic development reporter and can be reached at ericj@publicsource.org or on Twitter @ericjankiewicz.

Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation.



We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more.



Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ PUBLICSOURCE STORIES See what Allegheny County employees earned in 2024 — and how the county is hiding names of many top earners

Trump talks up U.S. Steel deal in Mon Valley as Pittsburgh-area towns laud jobs, await details on upgrades

Gainey has 7 months and 7 major development priorities. Here’s where they stand.

Zombies to 'Cabaret': How Perry High’s arts scene is driving school spirit Republish This Story Republish our articles for free, online or in print, under a Creative Commons license.