Here’s how President Donald Trump’s administration has roiled higher ed, and how the University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University and other local colleges and universities have responded.

This timeline will be updated as developments occur.

May 5

A 15% cap on indirect costs paid for by National Science Foundation grants goes into effect. CMU joins 12 universities and several higher ed organizations in a lawsuit against the federal government, fighting the cap.

“Our decision to challenge the federal government more than once in several months is the product of much thoughtful consideration and discussion,” CMU President Farnam Jahanian said in a message to the university community. The cap “would cause a sudden and severe shortfall for U.S. research universities, effectively crippling some of our nation’s greatest and surest engines of innovation and economic prosperity.”

In the message, he also addressed Trump’s 2026 budget proposal, stating that “presidential budget requests are rarely enacted as written.” As the budget process unfolds, CMU would continue to “amplify the pivotal impact of U.S. research universities and advocate for the importance of federal investment in research and education,” he said.

April 29

Eleven CMU international students and alumni have seen a restoration of legal status records, according to the university’s spokesperson. One student, who has completed work in the U.S. under Optional Practical Training [OPT], hadn’t seen records reinstated as of April 27.

Under OPT, some international students can be employed in the country for one to two years, before or after graduation.

April 28

All six international Pitt students and recent alumni impacted by sudden terminations of their legal status have seen their records restored, according to the university’s spokesperson. This follows the Trump administration’s decision on Friday to reverse course after students around the country, including some in Pittsburgh, filed lawsuits and judges began halting status revocations.

While immigration officials are “developing a policy that will provide a framework” for record terminations, a Department of Justice attorney said all students affected by the change over the last month would see reinstatements.

PublicSource reached out to CMU and La Roche University for information on their revoked students, but didn’t immediately receive a response.

April 21

The group Pittsburgh Healthcare Workers and Scientists sent an open letter, signed by more than 900 Pitt students, faculty and staff members, to university administrators. The letter calls on leaders to more firmly address visa revocations, federal research grant terminations and funding cuts.

The letter proposes the creation of a University Crisis Task Force to better respond to higher ed challenges and requests a meeting between some signatories and Pitt leaders in the next week.

La Roche University, Friday, Feb. 10, 2023, in McCandless. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource)

April 11

A visa held by an undergraduate student at La Roche is revoked, a university administrator shared with PublicSource.

Revocations and wipes of international students’ records through a Department of Homeland Security system have been widespread over the week. Much of this is occurring, schools and students report, without communication from the government and with no reasons provided.

U.S. Secretary of State Marco Rubio said last month that there’s “no right to a student visa” and argued that visas would be cancelled in cases the government finds “appropriate,” such as participation in pro-Palestinian demonstrations.

Without legal status, students with terminated visas risk deportation.

April 9

Visas held by two recent graduates and one current Pitt student are revoked, according to an email sent by a university administrator. The administrator said no known immigration agencies or authorities have been on campus, and the students were offered unspecified “support.”

PublicSource reached out to Duquesne, Point Park, La Roche, Carlow, Chatham and Robert Morris universities to ask if students or recent graduates have been impacted by sudden visa terminations. Spokespeople for Duquesne, Point Park, Carlow and Chatham said there haven’t been any changes. RMU did not immediately respond.

April 7

Visas held by five recent graduates and two current CMU students are revoked, following a trend seen at universities across the country. The university reports that no immigration authorities have been on campus, and the students were connected with legal resources.

March 19

A congressional committee sends letters to six universities, including CMU, requesting information regarding Chinese students to assess national security risks. The letter states that U.S. higher ed institutions “are increasingly used as conduits for foreign adversaries to illegally gain access to critical research and advanced technology” and sets an April 1 deadline to turn over the details.

March 14

The U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights opens investigations into CMU and 44 other universities nationwide for alleged Civil Rights Act violations following the guidance set out in the department’s “Dear Colleague” letter. The department said these institutions engaged in “race-exclusionary” practices within their grad programs by partnering with The Ph.D. Project, which “limits eligibility based on the race of participants.”

University of Pittsburgh administrators listen to faculty ask questions over Zoom at Pitt’s faculty assembly meeting on Wednesday, March 12, at Posvar Hall in Oakland. (Photo by Anastasia Busby/PublicSource)

March 13

After Pitt paused faculty and staff hiring, administrators say that federal actions are not the only reason for the freeze. At a university faculty assembly meeting, Pitt’s Chief Financial Officer Dwayne Pinkney says enrollment trends, inflation and flat state funding were also behind the decision. The freeze would’ve happened “a little later” if not for recent events, he says — federal funding uncertainty was simply the catalyst.

Some faculty members at the meeting voice concerns about needing to fill critical teaching positions and mention they were interviewing candidates when the halt was announced. University Provost Joseph McCarthy says exceptions to the freeze are being developed and hiring decisions going forward will be evaluated based on whether they support and advance Pitt’s mission.

Faculty raise questions about Pitt leadership’s transparency regarding the financial challenges that Pinkney says have persisted over the last three to five years. He acknowledges that they haven’t served faculty well in this area, and vows better communication going forward.

March 10

The Pitt administration sends email announcing a hiring freeze until the end of the fiscal year in June, or beyond, and instructing departments to reduce non-compensation expenses, avoid nonessential travel and limit the purchase of discretionary supplies.

March 6

The National Association of Science Writers announces that Pitt and CMU pulled out of hosting the group’s annual conference, citing financial constraints related to federal funding uncertainty. Pitt’s spokesperson attributed it to “fiscal prudence while we evaluate the evolving landscape.” CMU’s spokesperson similarly cited “the current climate and uncertainties ahead.”

March 3

Christina Clark, La Roche’s president, sends email to faculty, students and staff updating them on the actions senior leaders have taken to address federal changes, including creation of a task force focused on monitoring federal actions and making recommendations. “There is a lot happening, but I will only communicate on federal actions that have become law and have been implemented. As always, La Roche will comply with local, state and federal laws,” Clark writes.

Feb. 27

Pitt is reported to be in the “early stages” of resuming Ph.D. admissions offers.

The Community College of Allegheny County (photo by Jay Manning/PublicSource)

Feb. 26

The Community College of Allegheny County sends email to faculty, staff and students stating that work is occurring with stakeholders and national organizations to understand the guidance from the “Dear Colleague” letter. “In the meantime, please know that we continue to prioritize our core values in addressing any necessary modifications which may be required by this new federal guidance. And we remain committed to providing a safe, welcoming and supportive environment,” the email reads.

Feb. 21

Pitt pauses Ph.D. admissions in response to the proposed (but paused) cap on indirect costs associated with National Institutes of Health grants. Parts of Trump’s executive orders targeting diversity, equity and inclusion [DEI] programs are blocked by a federal judge. Pitt Chancellor Joan Gabel releases a message saying that university administrators are reviewing federal guidance, and noting that Pitt is “open to everyone.”

Feb. 20

PublicSource reports that several Pitt and CMU web pages and websites with references to DEI have been removed entirely or altered. A spokesperson for Pitt says the university’s 150,000 web pages are mostly “maintained by individual units or people. It is not uncommon for pages to be published, unpublished or moved for any number of reasons.”

Feb. 14

The U.S. Department of Education sends a “Dear Colleague” letter to schools, colleges and universities stating that consideration of race in admissions, programs, scholarships, graduation ceremonies and “all other aspects of student, academic and campus life” is illegal. This letter didn’t have the force of law but set a 14-day deadline for institutions to comply or risk their federal funding.

Feb. 11

Chancellor-Elect Joan Gabel. (Courtesy of Aimee Obidzinski/University of Pittsburgh)

After a temporary restraining order blocks the indirect costs cap, Gabel releases a message stating that although the university isn’t an individual plaintiff in lawsuits challenging Trump administration grant funding decisions, it’s “well represented at the leadership level” of the associations involved and is “providing supporting documentation.”

Feb. 10

Three separate lawsuits in response to the cap are filed by several state attorneys, a nonprofit, and a group of universities and higher education organizations. CMU is a co-plaintiff in one.

Feb. 9

Pitt administration sends email acknowledging the announcement and stating that a financial impact analysis is underway. The university is the country’s sixth-largest recipient of NIH funding among educational institutions. “There is no doubt that our collective scholarly impact could be harmed irreparably, as could our broader mission,” the email notes.

Feb. 7

A 15% cap on indirect costs for research funded by the NIH is announced. Many universities negotiate rates for these costs well above the proposed rate — for example, Pitt’s rate is 59%.

Feb. 3

Ken Gormley, Duquesne University’s president, sends email to students, faculty and staff addressing community concerns around immigration, saying that the university doesn’t have any known undocumented students, but administrators understand worries about “being targeted or detained despite having legal status.” He also announces that working groups are being created to “research and recommend actions” related to Trump administration orders on topics including research funding, immigration and academic freedom.

Duquesne University’s campus. (Photo by Alexis Wary/PublicSource)

Jan. 29

The federal Office of Management and Budget [OMB] memo is withdrawn, but plans to scrutinize programs and research not aligned with the new administration’s orders remained.

Jan. 27

OMB directs federal agencies to implement a funding freeze. Agencies are told to evaluate and identify places where spending conflicts with new executive orders, leaving institutions scrambling to evaluate the implications.

Jan. 24

Jahanian, CMU’s president, releases message that the university is evaluating recent executive orders and expects it will take several weeks to understand their impact. He urges “meaningful, civil discourse that makes space for many perspectives.”

Jan. 20

Trump returns to office and begins signing a barrage of executive orders. More than 20 currently have implications for higher ed. Orders call for stricter vetting for those receiving visas; no funding for DEI programs; investigations into universities with endowments above $1 billion; reversal of protections for transgender students; and heightened deportation of undocumented students.

Maddy Franklin reports on higher ed for PublicSource, in partnership with Open Campus, and can be reached at madison@publicsource.org.

This story was fact-checked by Rich Lord. Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation.



We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more.



Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ PUBLICSOURCE STORIES See what Allegheny County employees earned in 2024 — and how the county is hiding names of many top earners

Trump talks up U.S. Steel deal in Mon Valley as Pittsburgh-area towns laud jobs, await details on upgrades

Gainey has 7 months and 7 major development priorities. Here’s where they stand.

Zombies to 'Cabaret': How Perry High’s arts scene is driving school spirit Republish This Story Republish our articles for free, online or in print, under a Creative Commons license.