I’ve always felt Pittsburgh punches above its weight class. It’s more of a big town than a small city — about the same population as Gilbert, Arizona.
But Pittsburgh has story, grit, and an absurd visual landscape. It can be a tough place to live, which brings an authenticity to the people. Nobody moves to Pittsburgh to “make it big” or ski 100 days of the year. Pittsburgh folk are, for the most part, grounded. Normal. Crusty. Hard working.
As a cameraman, it was such a joy to run around Pittsburgh and hunt for the perfect sightline. The “higgledy piggledy” of the hillsides, as described by one Polish Hill resident, is just so hard not to fall in love with. Gazing upon a village on a distant hillside scratches some deep evolutionary itch.
Capturing the hillsides, and the people that milled about on the streets within them, became the foundation of my little film career. I produced 21 episodes of my “Neighborhoods” web series . Since then, almost every opportunity that has come my way has been because somebody found the Neighborhoods videos on YouTube and sent me an email.
So it feels a bit like I’m shooting myself in the foot by leaving Pittsburgh. But as the saying goes, “Sometimes you need to shoot yourself in the foot to make better YouTube videos,” … or something like that.
I’m still too close to my time in Pittsburgh to have a clear perspective of what the past decade has meant to me, but this video is my first attempt at looking back.
This video was made in collaboration with PublicSource. Dean Bog is a filmmaker based in Portland, Oregon. He can be reached through his website, DeanBogFilms.com or on Patreon, @Dean Bog . NEIGHBORHOODS SERIES EXPLORE THE WEB SERIES Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW MOST READ PUBLICSOURCE STORIES See what Allegheny County employees earned in 2024 — and how the county is hiding names of many top earners Trump talks up U.S. Steel deal in Mon Valley as Pittsburgh-area towns laud jobs, await details on upgrades Gainey has 7 months and 7 major development priorities. Here’s where they stand. Zombies to 'Cabaret': How Perry High’s arts scene is driving school spirit
Dean Bog is a filmmaker based in Portland, Oregon. He can be reached through his website, DeanBogFilms.com or on Patreon, @Dean Bog . NEIGHBORHOODS SERIES EXPLORE THE WEB SERIES

Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation. We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more. Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support!


See what Allegheny County employees earned in 2024 — and how the county is hiding names of many top earners Trump talks up U.S. Steel deal in Mon Valley as Pittsburgh-area towns laud jobs, await details on upgrades Gainey has 7 months and 7 major development priorities. Here’s where they stand. Zombies to 'Cabaret': How Perry High’s arts scene is driving school spirit