Pittsburgh stories through photos

As President Donald Trump continued to criticize Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy via social media on Monday, Pittsburghers gathered to hear the stories of their neighbors with ties to Ukraine at a rally to show support for the war-torn country. Natalka Rymar, pictured above, who moved to the U.S. from a Ukrainian border town after Russia invaded Crimea in 2014, held tight to her blue-and-gold flag dripping with red paint as she remembered the family, friends, colleagues and childhood memories she left in her home country. “My biggest wish is that people do not listen to Russian propaganda,” said Rymar, of West View, from a Downtown sidewalk packed with fellow Ukraine supporters. “If Russia really wanted peace, Russia could stop war any minute, because Russia is the aggressor.”









People rally to support Ukraine on March 3, in Downtown Pittsburgh. Between 200 and 250 people showed up outside of U.S. Sen. Dave McCormick’s office and delivered letters demanding he hold a town hall and speak out in support of Ukraine. (Photo by Stephanie Strasburg/PublicSource)

Over three years and one combative presidential meeting after the start of the war in Ukraine, a coalition of Pittsburgh organizations gathered outside U.S. Sen. Dave McCormick’s office and delivered letters demanding he hold a town hall and speak out in support of Ukraine. “We want support for Ukraine, support for NATO. We could not be more horrified by the capitulation to Putin,” said co-organizer Michele Feingold, of Squirrel Hill. Passing cars honked along Grant Street and some people joined on their lunch break, leaving their handmade signs with others as they dashed back to work.

Zelenskyy concluded a tour through Europe to gather support after he left the White House on Friday without a signed minerals deal following a heated back and forth with Trump and Vice President J.D. Vance. On Monday, Trump suggested that a peace agreement to end the war with Russia “should not be that hard,” but suggested that if Zelenskyy “doesn’t want to make a deal, I think that person won’t be around very long.”

Photojournalists experience the city and the Greater Pittsburgh region in a unique way. They’re regularly sent out on assignments to make portraits, cover protests, document public meetings and envision people and places we talk about in PublicSource stories. But they see so much more. That’s The Glimpse.

Your gift will keep stories like this coming. Have you learned something new today? Consider supporting our work with a donation.



We take pride in serving our community by delivering accurate, timely, and impactful journalism without paywalls, but with rising costs for the resources needed to produce our top-quality journalism, every reader contribution matters. It takes a lot of resources to produce this work, from compensating our staff, to the technology that brings it to you, to fact-checking every line, and much more.



Your donation to our nonprofit newsroom helps ensure that everyone in Allegheny County can stay informed about the decisions and events that impact their lives. Thank you for your support! GIVE NOW

Republish This Story Republish our articles for free, online or in print, under a Creative Commons license.