This story was originally published by Technical.ly, a news partner of PublicSource. You can sign up for their newsletters at technical.ly/subscribe.

Pittsburgh aims to position itself as a leader in space, and it’s building the startup ecosystem to make that happen.

Perhaps most notably, the aerospace company Astrobotic.

In 2007, Pittsburgh-based Astrobotic emerged from the corridors of Carnegie Mellon University with an ambitious mission: to lead humanity back to the moon.

The 2024 Technical.ly Award-winning company, founded to compete for the Google Lunar X Prize, began as a small startup amid the backdrop of an economic downturn and waning lunar ambitions after NASA’s Constellation program was canceled. To become the leader in space technology that it’s known as today, it’s been an uphill battle.

“We were trying to build a moon company when no one was thinking about going to the Moon. Potential investors literally laughed at us,” CEO John Thornton told Technical.ly.

Now, Astrobotic stands as a powerhouse in space exploration, boasting over $600 million in contracts, 275 employees and lunar missions under NASA’s Commercial Lunar Payload Services (CLPS) initiative which allows NASA to contract commercial entities for lunar delivery services. This initiative is crucial for making lunar exploration commercially viable, providing a platform for Astrobotic to carry out its mission.

Still, that journey has been full of ups and downs. Like most startups, it faced failures in between the deals it landed. Here’s a timeline of key moments in the startup’s journey, and a look ahead at what’s next.

Lunar missions extend beyond just getting there

Astrobotic’s mission extends beyond lunar landings. Its 47,000-square-foot Pittsburgh headquarters, in the North Side's Chateau neighborhood, is the largest private facility dedicated to other lunar logistics, too.

It features integration cleanrooms, rover test labs and a Mission Control Center that oversees lunar operations. Death of an ‘elder orphan’ warns that aging alone may become more dangerous Pittsburgh leaders try to coordinate response to Trump budget cuts, seeing ‘long haul’ challenges PublicSource stories on overdoses, jail program win Vann awards Fearing radioactive waste, Grove City community fights to stop landfill reopening Gainey has 7 months and 7 major development priorities. Here’s where they stand.

“Our cleanrooms and test facilities simulate lunar environments, ensuring mission hardware performs under extreme conditions,” Thornton said.

The company also pioneers LunaGrid, a solar-based power distribution service for lunar surface operations.

With LunaGrid-Lite set for a 2026 demonstration, Astrobotic aims to sustain long-term lunar exploration by enabling rovers, landers and habitats to survive the harsh lunar night. This technology is a vital part of making lunar exploration sustainable and commercially viable.

A lunar economy built to include all of Pittsburgh

Astrobotic’s partnerships with NASA, the Department of Defense and private entities reflect a shift toward commercializing space exploration.

“The public-private model fosters international collaboration and ensures sustainable lunar missions,” Thornton said.

With over 60 contracts secured, including reusable rocket engines and navigation technologies, Astrobotic is cementing its role as a cornerstone of the burgeoning lunar economy. These partnerships are critical for reducing costs and sharing risks among multiple stakeholders according to Thornton.

The company also connects its lunar ambitions to the Pittsburgh community. Universities like Carnegie Mellon provide a pipeline of talent, while the region’s manufacturing legacy supports a localized supply chain.

The adjacent Moonshot Museum, launched in 2022, has welcomed over 18,000 visitors and inspired more than 32,000 students through STEM programs.

Still, the Peregrine Mission One is arguably the more profound part of its modern legacy. It offered valuable lessons despite its challenges.

“Failure is a stepping stone,” Thornton said. “The data we collected and the operational insights gained have strengthened our readiness for Griffin Mission One.” These learnings are crucial for refining Astrobotic’s approach and preparing for future lunar missions, he added.

Looking ahead, Astrobotic’s focus remains on robotic and autonomous spacecraft, setting the stage for human exploration.

“The moon is Earth’s nearest celestial neighbor and is the place we will learn to live and work on another planetary body,” Thornton said. “Our robotic missions on the lunar surface are paving the way for that future.”